Financial Performance Measures for Iowa Farms
 

 Farmers who have a large investment in land,
 machinery, livestock, and equipment need to keep
 informed about the financial condition of their
 operations. Some useful measures of financial
 performance can be calculated from information found
 in most farm record books and accounting programs.
 These measures can help farmers assess the
 profitability, debt capacity, and financial risk currently
 faced by their businesses. The measures presented in
 this publication are based on guidelines of the Farm
 Financial Standards Council, ffsc.org/, and are used by
 most agricultural lenders and farm accountants.
 Types of Measures
 Five different areas of financial condition are measured.
 Liquidity refers to the degree to which debt obligations
 coming due can be paid from cash or assets that
 soon will be turned into cash. This is measured by
 the current ratio, the amount of working capital, and
 the amount of working capital per dollar of gross
 revenue. A more thorough analysis of liquidity can be
 made with a cash flow budget. FM1792, AgDM File
 C3-15: Twelve Steps to Cash Flow Budgeting, store.
 extension.iastate.edu/Product/1815.pdf, explains this
 tool in detail.
 Solvency refers to the degree to which all debts are
 secured and the relative mix of equity and debt capital
 used by the farm. The total debt-to-asset ratio is one of
 several ratios used to measure solvency, all of which
 are based on the same relationship of assets, liabilities,
 and net worth.
 Profitability refers to the difference between income
 and expenses. One important measure of profitability is
 net farm income. Annual rates of return on both equity
 capital and total assets also can be calculated and
 compared to interest rates for loans or rates of return
 from alternative investments.
 Financial efficiency ratios show what percent of gross
 farm revenue went to pay interest, operating expenses,
 and depreciation, and how much was left for net farm
 income. The asset turnover ratio measures how much
 gross income was generated for each dollar invested in
 land, livestock, equipment, and other assets.
 Repayment capacity measures show the degree
 to which cash generated from the farm and other
 sources will be sufficient to pay principal and
 interest payments as they come due.
 Using Performance Measures
 Values for the farm financial measures should be
 calculated for several years to observe trends and
 to avoid making judgments based on an unusual
 year. Typical historical values for most of these
 measures can be found in the tables at the end of this
 publication. They are based on data obtained from
 the Iowa Farm Business Association (IFBA). Values
 will vary according to the major enterprises carried
 out, farm size, location, and the type of land tenure.
 Other comparable data can be found in the annual
 publication FM1789, AgDM File C1-10: Iowa Farm
 Costs and Returns, store.extension.iastate.edu/
 Product/1812.pdf.
 Liquidity
 Farms with good liquidity typically have current
 ratios of at least 3.0 or higher. Dairy farms or other
 farms that have continuous sales throughout the year
 can safely operate with a current ratio as low as 2.0,
 however. Conversely, operations that concentrate
 sales during several periods each year, such as cash
 grain farms, need to strive for a current ratio higher
 than 3.0, especially near the beginning of the year.
 The amount of working capital needed depends on
 the size of the operation. Records show that working
 capital measured at the beginning of the year is
 typically equal to about 50-70% of the farm’s annual
 gross revenue. For dairy farms, working capital can
 be as low as 30% of gross revenue, but cash grain
 farms may need as much as 50%.
 

 Solvency
 Total debt-to-asset ratios tend to be higher for larger
 farms and for farms that specialize in livestock
 feeding. Ratios of 10-30% are common among Iowa
 farms, although many operate with little or no debt. A
 high debt load does not make farms less efficient, but
 principal and interest payments eat into cash flow.
 High-efficiency farms are able to service a higher debt
 load safely.
 

 Two other ratios are commonly used to measure
 solvency. The equity-to-asset ratio shows how many
 dollars of net worth a farm has for every dollar of
 assets. It is equal to 100% minus the debt-to-asset
 ratio. Higher equity-to-asset ratios indicate a less risky
 financial situation. Some lenders prefer to use the
 debt-to-equity ratio to measure solvency. Higher ratios
 indicate more risk.
 Another useful measure is how much net worth the
 farm has for each crop acre farmed, especially for cash
 grain farms. The IFBA average is nearly $2,500.
 

 Profitability
 Net farm income from operations is what is left from
 all income received from the farm business in the
 past year, minus all the operating expenses used to
 generate this income. Note that operating expenses do
 not include the cost of financing the business, which is
 interest expense.
 Net farm income, or what is left after subtracting
 interest, is highly variable from year to year and is
 closely tied to the size and efficiency of the operation.
 It also depends on the amount of debt the farm is
 carrying. The rate of return on farm assets is quite
 variable, too, but average long-term rates of 6-10% have
 been common in Iowa. High-profit farms may average
 more than 12%, while low-profit farms often realize a
 return of only 2% or less.
 The average rate of return on farm equity measures how
 fast farm net worth is growing. Highly leveraged farms
 may earn little or no return on equity when interest
 rates are high. On the other hand, if the farm’s overall
 return on assets is higher than the cost of borrowed
 money, the return on equity may be quite high and net
 worth will grow rapidly.
 Operating profit margin is equal to the dollar return to
 capital divided by the value of farm production each
 year. Ratios have averaged about 6-10% in recent years,
 and 25-30% in the 2000s. High-profit farms have had
 ratios of 30% or more, while low-profit farms have had
 ratios of less than 10%. Farms that hire or rent assets
 such as labor, land, or machinery usually will have a
 lower operating profit margin because operating costs
 are higher. However, they will also generate a larger
 gross and net income. Farms with owned or crop share
 rented land will have a higher operating profit margin
 because they have lower operating expenses.
 

 Another common measure of profitability is Earnings
 Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization,
 abbreviated as EBITDA. It shows how many dollars
 are available for debt repayment.
 

 Financial Efficiency
 Asset turnover ratios for typical farms are about
 20-30%, but they can range from 10-20% for lowprofit farms and up to 30-50% for high-profit farms.
 The asset turnover ratio measures the efficient use
 of investment capital to generate revenue while the
 operating profit margin ratio measures the efficient
 use of operating capital. Because they are substitutes
 for each other (owned and rented land, for example),
 farms that are high in one measure may be low in the
 other.
 Farms with mostly rented land should have higher
 asset turnover ratios than farms with mostly owned
 land, generally around 50%. Rented farms also will
 have higher operating expense ratios because rent paid
 is included in operating expenses. Likewise, rented
 farms will tend to have lower depreciation and interest
 expense ratios than owned farms. Typically, about
 60-70% of gross revenue goes for operating expenses,
 5-10% goes for depreciation, and under 5% goes for
 interest.
 The average net farm income ratio for Iowa farms has
 been in the 5-15% range in recent years but used to be
 in the 20-30% range in the 2000s. High-profit farms
 have averaged 20% over the past decade, while lowprofit farms averaged less than 5%.