6. Every child and young person has a right to information, in a form that is understandable to them. Children and young people have a right to information that they can understand about their health and healthcare. This includes information about the choice of health care services available. Special attention and some creativity are often necessary to ensure that children have the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas, not only orally but also through other means of the child’s or young person’s choice, such as play and art. Ensuring that the language and format used are appropriate to the child’s or young person’s abilities and level of understanding is essential, as is ensuring that they have understood the information given and had every opportunity to participate in the conversations about their health and care. This right to information includes the right of tamariki and rangatahi to have access to information in Te Reo Māori and for those from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds to have access to information in their own language. It is crucial that health professionals talk directly to children and young people, as well as to their families/whānau, even if the child or young person may seem unable to comprehend. Health professionals and families/whānau should be as open as possible with children and young people about their health and healthcare. Like all patients, children and young people are entitled to know what is going to happen to them before a procedure occurs and to be given honest information about their condition and treatment outcomes, and to be helped to select and practice strategies for coping. Giving children and young people timely and accurate information means that they can retain a sense of control about their healthcare, particularly in hospital. Advance preparation for hospitalisation, healthcare procedures or impending surgery provides children and young people with a sense of mastery over the healthcare environment and helps them to cope more effectively with potentially stressful situations.

7. Every child and young person has a right to participate in decision-making and, as appropriate to their capabilities, to make decisions about their care. Children and young people have a right to be involved in decision-making about their healthcare, to the greatest extent possible in line with their capacities for understanding. The right to be involved in making decisions also includes the right to be involved in decisions about the use, return or disposal of any bodily parts or substances removed, changed or added in the course of health care. Children and young people should be offered healthcare choices wherever possible. Further, they are always entitled to a second opinion. Whenever a child or young person has questions and ideas about their healthcare, these should be heard. If their views cannot be acted on, they are entitled to an explanation. In order for children and young people to participate in decision-making, the health professionals caring for them ought to be available, trained and committed to communicating with children and young people. Effective communication is critical in healthcare, as children, young people and their families/whānau require appropriate information in order to provide informed consent to treatment. A child or young person needs to be able to talk with the staff caring for him or her, to understand who the staff are and what they do, and to question them about his or her condition and treatment. Participation can include both verbal and nonverbal communication by children and young people with health professionals. It should also include opportunities to communicate through play, art and other media of the child’s or young person’s choice. Health professionals need to pay attention to ensure that appropriate responses are made to the nonverbal cues and communication by children and young people who use this as their main form (for example, infants, very young children and those with disabilities). The right to participation extends beyond the right of every individual child and young person to participate in his or her care. It includes encouraging and supporting children and young people as groups to be involved in consultation on the development, implementation and evaluation of the services, policies and strategies that have an impact on them. Informed consent is to be sought from children, young people and their families/whānau before they are involved in teaching or research. Also, those who do agree to participate must have the opportunity to withdraw at any time without having to give a reason, even if they consent initially. The decision not to participate in teaching or research must not alter access to treatment. Ethical oversight by a Human Research Ethics Committee of all research projects conducted in child healthcare services is part of protecting the children and young people involved.
