F. Telecommunication System
Once separated from the host spacecraft (lander or rover), the Mars Helicopter can only communicate to or be
commanded from Earth via radio link. This link is implemented using a COTS 802.15.4 (Zig-Bee) standard 900 MHz
chipset, SiFlex 02, originally manufactured by LS Research. Two identical SiFlex parts are used, one of which is an
integral part of a base station mounted on the host spacecraft, the other being included in the helicopter electronics.
These radios are mounted on identical, custom PC boards which provide mechanical support, power, heat distribution,
and other necessary infrastructure. The boards on each side of the link are connected to their respective custom antennas.
The helicopter antenna is a loaded quarter wave monopole positioned near the center of the solar panel (which also
serves as ground plane) at the top of the entire helicopter assembly and is fed through a miniature coaxial cable routed
through the mast to the electronics below. The radio is configured and exchanges data with the helicopter and base
station system computers via UART.
One challenge in using off-the-shelf assemblies for electronics systems to be used on Mars is the low temperatures
expected on the surface. At night, the antenna and cable assemblies will see temperatures as low as −140 C. Electronics
assemblies on both base station and helicopter will be kept “warm” (not below −15 C) by heaters as required. Another
challenge is antenna placement and accommodation on the larger host spacecraft. Each radio emits approximately
0.75 W power at 900 MHz with the board consuming up to 3 W supply power when transmitting and approximately
0.15 W while receiving. The link is designed to relay data at over-the-air rates of 20 kbps or 250 kbps over distances of
up to 1000 m.
A one-way data transmission mode is used to recover data from the helicopter in real time during its brief sorties.
When landed, a secure two-way mode is used. Due to protocol overhead and channel management, a maximum return
throughput in flight of 200 kbps is expected while two-way throughputs as low as 10 kbps are supported if required by
marginal, landed circumstances.

G. Power & Energy System
The helicopter is powered by a Li-Ion battery system that is recharged daily by a solar panel. The energy in the
battery is used for operating heaters to survive the cold Martian nights as well as operate the helicopter actuators and
avionics during short flights lasting from 90 seconds to a few minutes. Depending on the latitude of operations and the
Martian season, recharging of this battery through the solar panel could occur over one to multiple sols (Martian days).
The helicopter battery shown in Fig. 12 consists of 6 Sony SE US1865o VTC4 Li-ion cells with a nameplate capacity
of 2 Ah. The maximum discharge rate is greater than 25 A amd the maximum cell voltage specified by the manufacturer
is 4.25 V. The continuous tested power load capability of this batterry is 480 W with a peak power capability of
510 W. Battery voltage is in the range of 15–25.2 V and the total mass of the 6 cells is 273 g. A cell balancing charge
management system controlled by the FPGA ensures that the all the individual cells are at a uniform voltage.
A de-rated end-of-life battery capacity of 35.75 Wh is available for use. Of this capacity, 10.73 Wh (30%) is kept as
reserve, night-time survival energy usage is estimated at 21 Wh for typical operation in the northern latitudes in the
spring season, and approximatley 10 Wh is available for flight. Assuming that 20% of the power is at the peak load of
510 W and 80% is at a continuous load of 360 W, approximately 90 sec of flight is possible. These energy projections
represent conservative worst-case end-of-mision battery performance at 0 C initial temperature. More moderate power
loads will extend the flight time.
The solar panel is made from Inverted Metamorphic (IMM4J) cells from SolAero Technologies. The cells are
optimized for the Mars solar spectrum and occupy a rectangular area with 680 cm2 of substrate (544 cm2
active cell
area) in a region centered and immediately above the co-axial rotors. This region minimally interferes with the flow
through the rotor.

H. Thermal System
The helicopter must survive the cold of the night on Mars where temperatures can drop to -100 C or lower. The
most critical component is the battery which is kept above -15 C through the night as it powers Kapton film heaters
attached to the battery cells. The avionics boards in the ECM surround the battery and are also kept at an elevated
temperature by virtue of their proximity to the warm battery assembly. Insulation around the avionics boards is provided
by a carbon-dioxide gap of 3 cm width. Additional insulation can be provided by replacing the carbon-dioxide gas with
an Aerogel formulation. The outermost fuselage thermal coating is from Sheldahl with Solar absorptivity α = 0.8 and
infra-red (IR) emissivity  = 0.1.
In addition to thermal losses through the gas gap (or aerogel), additional losses occur due to conduction in the mast
as well as through the copper wiring that penetrate the ECM from the mast. To minimize the latter, the wire gauges are
selected to be of the thinnest gauges that can still support the current draw during operations without overheating.
Prior to flight, under the control of the FPGA, the thermal system powers on heaters in the motor control boards that
have been exposed to the ambient temperatures. The internal battery temperature is brought up to 5 C to allow hi-power
energy extraction from the cells. During operation the ECM and battery warm up as a result of avionics operations and
battery self-heating. However, the thermal inertia of the elements is such that for the short flights of the helicopter, there
is no overheating.