The management of the complexity does not try to avoid the conflict existing inside the process of human vs. product interaction by modifying the user behavior. Instead, to reduce the complexity is necessary to alter the suggested tasks for that product, and which are susceptible of being modified by the future user. This modification made by the person is dynamic, such as the evolutionary process of adaptation of the product to his own preferences. But this spectrum of changes must be contemplated inside the original plans of the product conceptualization. Then, the existing level of complexity must be measured by the agent (user) skills. From this point we have two possibilities to define the level of complexity. The first one is aims to identify the level of complexity inside the prescribed activity to be made the agent. And the second possibility is related to the skills or incompetence of the agent. This works with the level of instruction of the human being related to the product that will use. This consideration is important, because it will show in which extend the product will satisfy the users expected necessities.

To deal with the components of the system and avoiding its complexity is important to define clearly the kind of model and its final target use. In many situations, the intention of creating ways to demonstrate and clarifying the functions of the product has as a consequence a highly complex product with high cost and underutilization functionality, because the agent (user) is not properly defined or over assisted. 

While analyzing a group of students, by using a observation and non interventional methodology, was detected the “rookie intention to provide the highest technology to they projects, without considering the total information of users capability or the target of the product under development. Is know, that the intention is the best, but this could generate new problems instead of solve the older. The human evolutionary capability must provide him conditions to assimilate new technologies, but this is not a clearly condition because it depends on his social group and the way it conditions that evolutionary process. So, if this dynamic process is not really understood, the conceptualization of a new product could overestimate the learning capability (increasing the mental load to restrict management levels), generating uncontrollable interface andhigh-level complexity that demands a rework of the tasks defined for that product. An example for this situation, level of product complexity, is the Wi-Fi router. On one side the user operates it and understand it as a easy way of connectivity of its electronic appliances without physic contact (this demands a basic information of its use). On the other side a physic scientist will analyze from another perspective, like radiation, signal intensity or electromagnetic behaviors. So, this is a situation when the complexity achieves highest level, needing to incorporate the interface as its own domain [8].