The most direct method for measuring retail shoppability is to talk with customers. This can be as simple as asking shoppers what they like and dislike about the store, or a more structured questionnaire where people evaluate the quality of the shopping experience on several dimensions. Focus group studies can be a useful first step
to identify problems with the shopping environment, but surveys are a better tool for the ongoing measurement
and evaluation of store performance. A survey might ask shoppers to rate the store on specific features, including
the breadth and depth of product assortments, the perception of product quality and value, the attractiveness of
displays and merchandising, the ease of navigation, the level of shopping convenience, the availability of product
information, the frequency of out-of-stocks, the quality of service, and the speed of checkout; as well as collecting more general reactions, such as overall enjoyment of the shopping experience, satisfaction with the products
purchased, likelihood of recommending the store, and intention to return in the future.

One common technique for collecting this information is the exit interview, where customers are asked to share
their reactions after completing the shopping trip. The survey can be conducted immediately following the store
visit — shoppers are intercepted and questioned as they leave the store — or at a later time using the customer’s
phone number or e-mail address captured at checkout. Alternatively, the retailer can print the telephone number
or web address of an automated survey on the sales receipt, along with an incentive to complete the interview.
Another popular data-collection method is the critical incident technique. Shoppers are contacted at home and
asked to remember the last time they went shopping for a particular product. Consumers recall the positive and
negative aspects of the shopping experience and offer suggestions for improvement.

Customer feedback can be collected on an ongoing basis from several other sources. Customer comments, complaints and suggestions at an in-store service desk or remote call center may suggest difficulties with service
quality and other aspects of the shopping experience. Superquinn actively solicits such feedback from customers
by rewarding each shopper with 100 SuperClub loyalty program points each time they report a company goof.
Product returns and exchanges highlight potential problems in product quality and customer education. Customer
inquiries, both in the store and through a toll-free number, can signal demand for new products. Employees are
also a valuable source of information on what customers want, how they shop, and the obstacles they encounter.

Survey research offers several benefits. It provides quick and inexpensive consumer feedback. It generates diagnostic information that can help guide improvements in the shopping experience. It allows the researcher to
evaluate the importance of shopping factors for specific consumer segments and product categories. Store ratings can be benchmarked against competitors and tracked over time to evaluate performance. Surveys also have
limitations that should be kept in mind. Consumers may not notice or report poor performance because it is
what they have come to expect. Consumer memory is limited, so shoppers may not recall shelf arrangements,
merchandising, and promotions, even though these variables affect their behavior. Consumers are only knowledgeable about the specific stores and categories they shop, so some ratings may not be reliable. Finally, it can be
difficult to relate survey results to more objective measures of store performance.