Mortgage Classifications
Mortgages can be classified into several categories based on their characteristics. The broadest
distinction is between government-insured mortgages and conventional mortgages. Government-
insured mortgages have mortgage insurance from a government agency, such as FHA, VA, or
USDA, whereas conventional mortgages do not have government insurance. As previously noted,
this insurance pays the lender if the borrower defaults. Borrowers can also be classified into two
broad groups based on their credit history: prime and non-prime. Although there is no single
agreed-upon definition, prime borrowers generally have very good credit and are offered more
attractive mortgage terms, such as better interest rates, than non-prime borrowers. Non-prime
borrowers exhibit one or more factors that make them appear riskier to lenders, such as past credit
problems or a lack of complete income and asset documentation.
Conventional mortgages can be broken down into two additional groups, conforming and
nonconforming mortgages. Conforming loans are loans eligible to be purchased in the secondary
market by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two GSEs that are discussed later in this report. To be a
conforming loan, the mortgage must meet certain creditworthiness thresholds (such as a
minimum credit score) and be less than the “conforming loan limit,” a legal cap on the principal
balance of the mortgage that can vary based on the geographic area where the house is located.18
Borrowers with conforming loans are usually prime borrowers.
Nonconforming loans can be broken down into three additional categories depending on the
reason they are not conforming. First, nonconforming loans above the conforming loan limit are
called jumbo loans.19 Second, Alt-A loans are for near-prime borrowers who may have credit
problems or who do not have complete documentation for income or assets. Third, subprime
loans are generally for the riskiest borrowers; they either have low credit scores, documentation
issues, or some other factor that makes them appear to be riskier to lenders. Subprime borrowers
are likely to be charged a higher interest rate to compensate the lender for the additional risk.20
Risks Associated with Holding Mortgages
When a lender originates a mortgage, it accepts certain risks. The three major risks are credit,
prepayment, and funding risk.
Credit risk refers to the risk that the lender bears if a borrower does not repay the mortgage on
time. 21 Prepayment risk is the risk that a mortgage will be paid off sooner than expected,
typically by a borrower refinancing the mortgage or selling the home. This is more likely to
happen when interest rates fall, because borrowers are more likely to refinance their mortgages to
take advantage of lower interest rates. 22 When a borrower refinances, the lender is paid in full the
amount owed, but it now has to reinvest those funds at a time when its expected return on new
investments is lower because interest rates have fallen.
Although prepayment risk is a risk associated with falling interest rates, there are also risks for
lenders that come from rising interest rates. One of these risks, called funding risk, arises because
some lenders borrow money in the short term to fund long-term investments, such as 30-year
mortgages. Short-term interest rates are typically lower than long-term interest rates because of
the additional risk associated with lending money for a longer period of time. Lenders, therefore,
can profit from the difference, or spread, between the short-term and long-term rates. If interest
rates rise, then the lender will have to borrow funds at a higher interest rate, while still earning the
same interest rate on the mortgage. As long as the short-term rate stays below the long-term
return, the lender would profit on the difference, although its profits would be lower than if the
short-term interest rates had not increased. If short-term rates increase above the fixed return on
the mortgage, then the investment would no longer be profitable.
Another lender’s risk associated with rising interest rates is opportunity costs. If interest rates rise,
but lender’s money is tied up in long-term mortgages made at lower interest rates, then the lender
is missing out on higher returns that it could be earning if it were able to originate mortgages or
make other investments at the higher current interest rate.
The lender that originates a mortgage does not necessarily have to bear all of the associated risks.
In some cases, the borrower could bear some of these risks. Adjustable-rate mortgages, for
example, transfer the risk that interest rates might rise from the lender to the borrower. Lenders
can also sell mortgages to investors, who then bear the risks associated with the mortgage. The
market for buying and selling mortgages is called the secondary market, which is described
below.
The Secondary Market
After a lender originates a mortgage loan, the lender has several options. The lender could choose
to hold the mortgage in its portfolio or sell it to another entity. Mortgages are bought and sold in
the secondary market to domestic and international investors. When a mortgage is sold, the
mortgage servicer may change. In any case, the borrower continues to send monthly mortgage
payments to the mortgage servicer.23 The servicer remits the payments to the entity that purchased
the mortgage.
The secondary market plays an important role in providing funding for loans made in the primary
market. When a mortgage is sold in the secondary market, the lender can use the proceeds to fund
additional new mortgages in the primary market. If the lender holds the mortgage in its portfolio,
the lender has fewer available funds to make new mortgages. Furthermore, selling the loan to
another entity allows the lender to transfer mortgage lending risks to the buyer.
Securitization
When a lender sells a mortgage in the secondary market, the new mortgage holder can hold the
mortgage as a whole loan. When held as a whole loan, the mortgage is in the portfolio of the new
mortgage holder, and the new mortgage holder bears the risks associated with the mortgage.
Alternatively, the new mortgage holder may choose to securitize the mortgage instead of holding
it as a whole loan.24 Mortgage securitization comes in many different forms, but generally
speaking, the process involves a financial institution acquiring and combining (pooling together)
many different mortgages and then issuing a mortgage-backed security (MBS). An MBS can be
divided into different pieces, or tranches, that are sold to investors.25 The investors do not own
the underlying mortgages but are buying the right to receive the future stream of payments that
come from those mortgages. A servicer collects the payments of all the borrowers whose
mortgages are part of the security and remits the payments to the investors.
For investors, purchasing MBS offers several benefits compared with holding whole mortgages.
Most notably, an MBS is generally more liquid than whole mortgages, meaning it is easier to
quickly sell an MBS at the current price. Because the market for MBS is more liquid than the
market for whole mortgages, MBS might be attractive to investors who would not otherwise
choose to invest in mortgages. More investors in the mortgage market, in turn, can mean more
funding is available for lenders to offer mortgages. More funding available in the primary market,
and the existence of a secondary market where lenders know they can easily sell the mortgages
they make, can result in lower interest rates that lenders charge to borrowers.
Although securitization may have several advantages, it may also present several disadvantages.
Securitization—and the secondary market in general—requires additional participants to facilitate
the flow of credit than when a loan is held by the originator. Additional participants, with some
acting on behalf of others, can increase costs and introduce competing incentives for the various
participants and potential conflicts of interest. For example, more participants in the transaction
may result in a principal-agent problem, a situation in which one entity (the agent) is supposed to
work on behalf of another entity (the principal), but the agent may have an incentive to act in its
own best interest rather than in the best interest of the principal. For example, mortgage servicers
act on behalf of investors to evaluate a borrower for mortgage workout options or to begin the
foreclosure process when a borrower falls behind on mortgage payments, as specified by a
contract between the investor and the servicer. However, in some cases, a servicer may have an
incentive to choose the option that is in its own best interest rather than in the best interest of the
investor, and the investor might not be well positioned to police the servicer’s actions.26