Liu et al.,(2005) showed that the theaflavin derivatives had more potent anti-HIV-1 activity than catechin derivatives. These tea polyphenols could inhibit HIV-1 entry into target cells by blocking HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein-mediated membrane fusion. The fusion inhibitory activity of the tea polyphenols was correlated with their ability to block the formation of the gp41 six- helix bundle, a fusion-active core conformation. Computer-aided molecular docking analyses indicate that these tea polyphenols, theaflavin-3,3′-digallate (TF3) as an example, may bind to the highly conserved hydrophobic pocket on the surface of the central trimeric coiled coil formed by the N-terminal heptad repeats of gp41. These results indicate that tea, especially black tea, may be used as a source of anti-HIV agents and theaflavin derivatives may be applied as lead compounds for developing HIV-1 entry inhibitors targeting gp41.
EGCG present in green tea has been shown to inhibit Herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) (Oleviera, 2008; Issack et al., 2008) by possibly binding to the glycoproteins on the envelope of the virus, thereby preventing viral entry into the host cell. The increased stability of theaflavins compared to EGCG at neutral pH could make these black tea compounds a more feasible option for the design of an antiviral therapeutic agent than EGCG (Su et al, 2003). Black Tea Extract
Black Tea: Antiviral Activity & Boosting Immunity |
7
consisting primarily of theaflavins is not cytotoxic and can reduce or block the production of infectious HSV-1 virions in cultured A549 and Vero cells, thus inhibiting the infectivity of the virus by interfering in the attachment, penetration and viral DNA replication of HSV-1 particles (Cantatore et al.,2013).
The anti-influenza virus and anti-inflammatory activities of theaflavin derivatives have been reported by Zu at. el.,(2012). The theaflavins fraction (TF80%, with a purity of 80%) and three theaflavin (TF) derivatives from black tea have been found to exhibit potent inhibitory effects against influenza virus in vitro. The authors have used assays for neuraminidase (NA) activity, hemagglutination (HA) inhibition, a real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) for gene expression of hemagglutinin (HA) and a cytopathic effect (CPE) reduction assay for studying the activity of TFs. The results showed that the TFs exerted significant inhibitory effects on the NA of three different subtypes of influenza virus strains and also on HA through two major mechanisms. The TF derivatives might have a direct effect on viral particle infectivity affecting replication of the viral HA gene during early stage of infection. In addition, TFs decreased the expression level of the inflammatory cytokine IL-6 during viral infection, expression of which may result in serious tissue injury and apoptosis. Thus, the results indicated that TF derivatives are potential compounds with anti-influenza viral replication and anti-inflammatory properties.
A study of antiviral activity of theaflavins (extracted from black tea) against Hepatitis C virus (HCV) using human hepatoma Huh-7 cells showed significant decrease of infectivity of the virus in the presence of each of the three theaflavins, with a clear dose-dependent inhibitory effect. The antiviral activity of the theaflavins was confirmed by quantification of viral RNA. TF3 was found to be more active and the HCV pseudotyped virions confirmed their activity on HCV entry and demonstrated their pan-genotypic action by directly acting on the virus particle and inhibited cell-to-cell spread. Further, TFs in combination with Sofosbuvir and Daclatasvir which are FDA approved drugs for HCV, enhanced the antiviral activity of both drugs (additive effect) demonstrating that it could be used in combination with direct acting antivirals (DAA) used in hepatitis C therapy. Thus, theaflavins, that are present in high quantity in black tea, hold promise for therapeutic use against HCV infection and also as neutraceutical as it inhibit cell-to-cell entry of the virus (Chowdhury, et al., 2018).
In a study reported by Clark et al. (1998) it was demonstrated that theaflavins extracted from black tea were able to neutralize bovine coronavirus and rotavirus infections. The crude black tea extract and the various fractions of theaflavins extracted from black tea were tested individually and in combination for antirotaviral activity. The combination of theaflavin fractions (TF1 + TF2a + TF2b + TF3) was more active than the sum of the activities of these four fractions individually, indicating synergism amongst the TF components. The results of this study showed that theaflavin and theaflavin gallate derivatives have inactivation activity (in vitro) against both rotavirus and coronavirus. The crude black tea extract was also able to neutralize the coronavirus.
In view of the current pandemic created by the novel corona virus COVID-19, lot of efforts are on globally to develop suitable vaccine and to relook the existing drugs and molecules for effectiveness against the causative agent SARS-CoV-2 (Tang et al., 2020). Coronaviruses are enveloped positive-stranded RNA viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm (Belouzard et al. 2012). To deliver their nucleocapsid into the host cell they rely on the fusion of their envelope with the host cell membrane. The spike glycoprotein (S) mediates virus entry and is a primary determinant of cell tropism and pathogenesis. The RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) is known to be an important enzyme that catalyzes the replication of RNA from RNA templates.
Black Tea: Antiviral Activity & Boosting Immunity |
8

In a recent study published in the Journal of Medical Virology, 83 compounds used in Chinese medicine system were screened for their potential efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 by assessing their binding efficiency onto this RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of the COVID-19 virus (Lung et. al., 2020). The authors have generated three dimensional model structures of RdRp of SARS-CoV-2 (2019 Pandemic), SARS-CoV (2002 epidemic) and MERS-CoV (2012 epidemic) using Modeller UCSF Chimera (https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/) and SWISS-MODEL (https:// swissmodel. expasy.org/) to test the efficacy of the compounds. This virtual screening in this bioinformatics study revealed that out of the 83 compounds screened, theaflavin was the best compound on the basis of idock score (prediction of binding affinity), hydrophobic interactions and additional hydrogen bonds between theaflavin and amino acid near the active site of RdRp. This was further confirmed by lower binding energy when it docks the catalytic pocket of SARS-CoV-2 RdRp. These finding suggested that theaflavins could be used as a lead compound for developing a SARS-CoV-2 inhibitor that targets the RdRp. Theaflavins are present in black tea and the highest theaflavin contents are present in the black teas of Assam.
Though further in vivo, animal and clinical trials would be required to carry forward this research finding, it is quite interesting to note that an earlier study from Taiwan has in fact convincingly demonstrated the inhibition of SARS-CoV 3C-like protease activity by Theaflavin-3,3’-digallate (TF3) published in the journal Evidence based Complementary and Alternative Medicine (Chen et.al.,2005). The authors have reported that the extracts from Puer and Black tea were more potent than the green or oolong tea extracts in their inhibitory activities against a chymotrypsin-like (3CLPro) protease. In this study 3CL protease was a target and the virus of interest was SARS- CoV (2002 epidemic). This study also used docking approach to screen out the best inhibitory compounds using a natural product library consisting of 720 compounds. Two compounds, tannic acid and TF2b (Theaflavin 3-gallate) were found to be active against 3CL Protease. Since many other related to tannic acid and TF2b are also present in various kinds of teas, the authors further examined the inhibition of activity by various tea extracts and several well known pure ingredients present in teas. The water extracts of TF2b (theaflavin-3-gallate), TF3 (theaflavin diggallate) and tannic acid were found to be the best effective 3CLPro inhibitors with inhibitory concentration (IC50) of less than 10 μM. The results from this study showed that Puer and Black tea extracts were more potent than the green or oolong tea extracts in inhibitory activities against 3C-like protease (3CLPro) of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), notably the active constituents viz. Theaflavin-3-gallate (TF2b) theaflavin-3,3’-digallate (TF3) and tannic acid were effective 3CLPro inhibitors.