Annually, seasonal influenza is responsible for millions of infections and hundreds of thousands of deaths. The current method for managing influenza is vaccination using a standardized amount of the influenza virus’ primary surface antigen, hemagglutinin (HA), as the intended target of the immune response. This vaccination strategy results in vaccines with variable efficacy year to year due to antigenic drift of HA, which can be further exacerbated by manufacturing processes optimizing growth of vaccine virus in eggs. Due to these limitations, alternative vaccine platforms are actively being explored to improve influenza vaccine efficacy, including cell-based, recombinant protein, and mRNA vaccines. mRNA’s rapid, in vitro production makes it an appealing platform for influenza vaccination, and the success of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccines in the clinic has encouraged the development of mRNA vaccines for other pathogens. Here, the immunogenicity and protective efficacy of a quadrivalent mRNA vaccine encoding HA from four seasonal influenza viruses, A/California/07/2009 (H1N1), A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 (H3N2), B/Brisbane/60/2008 (B-Victoria lineage), and B/Phuket/3073/2013 (B-Yamagata lineage), was evaluated. In mice, a 120 μg total dose of this quadrivalent mRNA vaccine induced robust antibody titers against each subtype that were commensurate with titers when each antigen was administered alone. Following A/California/04/2009 challenge, mice were fully protected from morbidity and mortality, even at doses as low as 1 μg of each antigen. Additionally, a single administration of 10 μg of quadrivalent mRNA was sufficient to prevent weight loss caused by A/California/04/2009. These results support the promise of this mRNA vaccine for prevention and mitigation of influenza vaccine.The results presented here are encouraging and support the effectiveness of GLB quadrivalent influenza mRNA vaccines in generating HA-targeted neutralizing antibody responses which have been well-documented to correlate with protection from disease44,45,46. In addition to antibodies targeting HA, T cells are also an important immune mediator of infection and deserve analyses in future studies47. The presence of pre-existing CD4+ T cells has been shown to correlate with protection from influenza disease in humans, while memory CD8+ T cell activity is associated with protection from emerging influenza viruses48,49,50. An early study of influenza mRNA vaccines by Petsch et al. found mice vaccinated with PR8 HA mRNA exhibited CD4+ responses against a variety of MHC class II PR8 peptides as well as greater CD8+ cytotoxic activity than controls when tested with MHC class I PR8 peptides. The mRNA platform is a powerful development in vaccine technology, not only in regards to their flexibility, speed, and scalability, but in that they offer an alternative approach to the development of a universal influenza vaccine. To that end, in a 2022 paper by Arevalo et al., vaccination with mRNA encoding 20 different HAs, representative of all A and B subtypes, induced humoral responses against all antigens and protected mice and ferrets from influenza challenge with matched and mismatched strains22. Furthermore, a natural extension of immunization with multivalent HA mRNA vaccines are multi-antigenic mRNA vaccines. In 2020 Freyn et al. reported broad protection in mice vaccinated with modified mRNA encoding conserved sequences from HA, NA, M2, and NP on a single strand of mRNA at a dose as low as 50 ng23. A recent study of a pentavalent modified mRNA vaccine targeting HA, NA, NP, and matrix protein 2 (M2) from B/Victoria/2/1987-like lineage and HA from B/Yamagata/16/1988-like lineage was found to induce broadly cross-reactive antibodies against ancestral and contemporary B viruses from both lineages, as well as protect mice from morbidity and mortality following challenge with a panel of influenza B viruses24. Similarly, a 2022 study of mRNA vaccines containing HA, NA, NP, and M2 targeting group 2 influenza viruses was found to protect mice from all challenge viruses, even when administered as a single dose of 125 ng25. These results demonstrate the promise of mRNA vaccines to improve breadth and efficacy of influenza vaccines.