Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in
 Financial Services
 The financial industry’s adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) is
 evolving as financial firms employ ever greater levels of technology and automation to deliver
 services. Expanding on earlier models of quantitative analysis, AI/ML has often been adopted in
 finance to solve discrete challenges, such as maximizing profit and minimizing risk. Yet the
 industry’s adoption of the newer technology also occurs against perceptions that are steeped in
 tradition and historical financial regulation, and regulators want to ensure that the technology
 does not sidestep regulations frequently described as technology neutral.
 Technological advances in computer hardware, capacity, and data storage—which permit the collection and analysis of
 data—helped fuel the development and use of AI/ML technologies in finance. Unlike older algorithms that automated
 human-coded rules, new AI models can “learn” by themselves and make inferences and recommendations not identified by
 modelers in advance. This shift in technology has also enabled the use of new types of data including alternative data (i.e.,
 data that the consumer credit bureaus do not traditionally use), unstructured data (images or social media posts, etc.), and
 unlabeled information data—which, when combined, extend the technologies’ uses to new financial services or products.
 Different parts of the financial services industry have adopted AI/ML technology to varying degrees and for various
 purposes. Some uses of AI/ML include powering chatbots in customer service functions, identifying investment opportunities
 and/or executing trades, augmenting lending models or (more sparingly) making lending decisions, and identifying and
 preventing fraud. The extent to which a sector or firm adopts various technologies reflects a variety of factors, including a
 firm’s ability to fund internal development and regulatory requirements.
 The increased use of AI/ML to deliver financial services has attracted attention and led to numerous policy issues and
 subsequent policy actions. Such policy actions culminated in (1) the establishment of a task force on AI in the 116
 th Congress
 and the more recent working group in the House Committee on Financial Services in the 118th and (2) 2019 and 2023
 executive orders. The evolving legislative and regulatory framework regarding AI/ML use in finance is likely, at least in part,
 to influence the development of AI/ML financial services applications. Various financial regulators have indicated that
 regulated entities are subject to the full range of laws and regulations regardless of the technology used. Additionally, some
 regulators have identified regulations and issued guidance of particular relevance to financial firms employing AI/ML
 technologies.
 Financial industry policymakers face competing pressures. Financial service providers and technology companies are likely
 to continue adopting and promoting AI/ML to save time and money and promote accessibility, accuracy, and regulatory
 compliance. However, challenges and risks in the form of bias, potential for systemic risk and manipulation, affordability,
 and consequences for employment remain. Determining whether the existing regulatory structure is sufficient—or whether
 one that is more closely tailored to the technological capacities of the evolving technology is necessary—has emerged as a
 key consideration. Should Congress consider the legislative framework governing AI/ML in finance, industry and consumers
 alike will expect that it weighs the benefits of innovation with existing and potential future challenges and risks.