Recipients of Social Security COLAs After April 1977 (“Pickle Amendment”)
Section 503 of P.L. 94-566 generally requires states to provide Medicaid coverage for individuals
who would continue to be eligible for SSI/SSP if not for increases in their Social Security benefits
due to COLAs.64 Individuals qualify under this pathway it they
• are receiving Social Security benefits,
• lost SSI/SSP but would still be eligible for those benefits if Social Security COLAs
received since losing SSI/SSP were deducted from their income, and
• were eligible for and receiving SSI/SSP concurrently with Social Security for at
least one month after April 1, 1977.
209(b) states may exclude all, some, or none of the Social Security benefit increases that caused
ineligibility for SSI/SSP. This pathway is often known as the “Pickle Amendment” after the late
Representative J.J. Pickle.
Disabled Widow(er)s Receiving Benefit Increases Under P.L. 98-21
(“ARF Widow[er]s”)
(This pathway is closed to new enrollment and applies to relatively few people.)
Social Security provides widow(er)’s benefits starting at age 60, or at age 50 if the individual is
disabled and meets certain other criteria. The amount of the aged or disabled widow(er)’s benefit is
based on the deceased insured worker’s past earnings from covered employment, subject to a
permanent reduction for each month of entitlement before the widow(er)’s full retirement age (65-
67, depending on year of birth). Under P.L. 98-21, lawmakers eliminated the additional reduction
factor (ARF) for disabled widow(er)s aged 50-59, meaning their reduction penalty for claiming
benefits before their full retirement age was capped at the percentage applicable to aged widow(er)s
who first claim at age 60.
All states (including 209[b] states) are required to provide Medicaid coverage for individuals who
would continue to be eligible for SSI/SSP if not for increases in their widow(er)’s benefits due to
the elimination of the ARF (known as “ARF Widow[er]s”).65 Individuals qualify under this pathway
if they
• were entitled to Social Security benefits in December 1983 and received disabled
widow(er)’s benefits and SSI/SSP in January 1984,
• lost SSI/SSP eligibility because of the elimination of the ARF,
• have been continuously entitled to widow(er)’s benefits since January 1984,
• filed for Medicaid continuation before July 1, 1988 (or a slightly later date in some
cases), and
• would continue to be eligible for SSI/SSP if the value of the increase in disabled
widow(er)’s benefits under P.L. 98-21 and any subsequent COLAs were deducted
from their countable income.
Disabled Adult Children
Disabled adult children of retired, disabled, or deceased insured workers typically qualify for Social
Security disabled adult child’s (DAC) benefits if they are at least age 18 and became disabled
before they attained age 22. States are generally required to provide Medicaid coverage for
individuals who lose eligibility for SSI/SSP due to entitlement to or an increase in DAC benefits.
66
Individuals qualify under this pathway if they
• lose eligibility for SSI/SSP due to receipt of DAC benefits on or after July 1, 1987,
and
• would continue to be eligible for SSI/SSP if not for their entitlement to or an
increase in DAC benefits.
209(b) states may exclude all, some, or none of the DAC benefit or increases in that benefit that
caused ineligibility for SSI/SSP.
Widow(er)s Not Entitled to Medicare Part A (“Early Widow[er]s”)
States are generally required to provide Medicaid coverage for individuals aged 50 to 64 who lose
eligibility for SSI/SSP due to entitlement to Social Security widow(er)’s benefits but who are not
yet entitled to Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance).67 Individuals qualify under this pathway if
they
• are at least age 50 but have not yet attained age 65,
• received SSI/SSP in the month before their widow(er)’s benefits began,
• are not entitled to Medicare Part A,68 and
• would continue to be eligible for SSI/SSP if not for their entitlement widow(er)’s
benefits.69
Eligibility for Medicaid under this pathway continues until the individual becomes entitled to
Medicare Part A. 209(b) states may exclude all, some, or none of the widow(er)’s benefit that
caused ineligibility for SSP/SSI.
Recipients of a 1972 Social Security COLA
(This pathway is closed to new enrollment and applies to relatively few people.)
Section 249E of P.L. 92-603 requires states to provide Medicaid coverage for individuals who
would be eligible for SSI/SSP in the absence of a Social Security COLA enacted in 1972 under P.L.
92-336.70 Individuals qualify under this provision if they
• were entitled to Social Security benefits in August 1972,
• were receiving cash assistance under the former adult assistance programs in
August 1972 (or would have been eligible for such assistance in certain instances),
and
• would be eligible for SSI/SSP had the COLA under P.L. 92-336 not been applied to
their Social Security benefits.