There is no theoretical reason why the criteria used in the Sahm rule is associated with a recession—it is
an observed historical relationship for a small sample and may not always hold going forward. Sahm
herself has indicated that despite her rule getting triggered, she does not believe that the United States is
currently in a recession, although she believes that the risk of recession has increased.
The primary indicators used by the NBER are not currently consistent with a recession, and several
remain strong. For example, real gross domestic product has been positive since the third quarter of 2022
and grew by 1.4% and 2.8% in the first and second quarters of 2024, with real personal consumption expenditures up 1.5% and 2.3% over the same period. Real personal income less transfers grew in May
and June 2024 and were up 1.8% over the year in June.
Thus far, the only indications of a weakening economy are coming from the labor market, and even there,
indicators are inconsistent. Although there has been a 0.9 percentage point increase in the unemployment
rate and nonfarm payroll employment growth has slowed, employment growth remained positive, which
is inconsistent with a recession. (Recessions typically feature falling employment within the first three
months.) Employment as measured by a different survey has shown some decreases, but the NBER does
not track this measure as closely.
The unemployment rate could be rising for reasons associated with a weakening economy (e.g., workers
losing their jobs) or for neutral reasons (e.g., new entrants to the labor force). Data on the reasons for
unemployment suggest that the unemployment rate has risen at least partly because the economy has
weakened. Almost two-thirds of the increase in unemployment in the past year has come from people who
have lost their jobs (mostly via temporary layoffs or jobs ending), whereas around one-third has come
from people entering or reentering the labor force. On the other hand, the rise in unemployment has not
coincided with a rise in layoffs and discharges—which are still lower than during the expansion that
preceded the pandemic—as would be expected if the economy were entering a recession. Additionally,
many economists assessed that the unemployment rate was unsustainably low for over two years. Some
cooling in the labor market could indicate a rise to a more sustainable rate. Now the key question is
whether it will continue to rise. Unemployment remains low by historical standards, and if it does not rise
much further, a recession can be avoided.
