NOTICE AT COLLECTION
 We may collect the following categories of personal information (as defined in the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) and the California Customer Records statute), including sensitive personal information (as defined in the CCPA):
 Identifiers, such as name, email address, username and password, postal address, telephone number, signature, government-issued identifier, license plate number, IP address, and other similar identifiers.
 Characteristics of protected classifications and demographic information, such as gender, age, race, disability status, sexual orientation, gender identity, military/veteran status, marital status, national origin, and medical information.
 Commercial information, including information about your interests and consuming history or tendencies, such as products or services considered; transaction information when you request information, contact Guest Services, or purchase, return, request or exchange a product or service, including payment card information or other financial information; information provided in response to surveys or other research conducted on our behalf; and information you provide in public forums.
 Internet or other electronic network activity information, including information regarding your interactions with us online and information we obtain from third parties about use of our applications on third-party platforms or devices.
 Geolocation data, including precise or approximate location information provided by a mobile device or other device or product interacting with or detected by our sites, applications, or physical properties, where we are permitted by law to process this information.
 Audio, electronic, visual, or similar information, including telephone call recordings, other voice recordings, and still or video images captured by cameras or readers on or around our physical properties.
 Inferences based on the above.
 We collect this information so that we can best serve you, including to fulfill your requests and to share offers or information that we think you may be interested in. As further described in the “Use of Your Information by The Walt Disney Family of Companies” section in our Privacy Policy, we generally collect and use the above-listed categories of personal information to provide and manage our sites, applications, products, and services, and for other business or commercial purposes, such as advertising, marketing, and to improve our products and services.
 Certain data collection on our sites and applications by third parties for purposes of interest-based advertising and social media tools may be a “sale” or “sharing” under California privacy law. As defined by California law, we “sold” or “shared” certain data elements within the following categories of personal information: identifiers, demographic information, commercial information, Internet or other electronic network activity information, approximate geolocation, and inferences drawn from the above.
 If you would like to opt out of the sale or sharing of your personal information, you may click the “Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information” link in our website footers or in our application settings. Please note that your opt-out choice is specific to the digital property and to the device and browser you are using. You may additionally choose to provide the information requested in this opt-out form, which may enable us to take action on your opt-out request more broadly than for a specific digital property.
 We retain each category of personal information that we collect for as long as necessary to fulfill the purposes described in our Privacy Policy, including to satisfy legal or reporting requirements. What this means in practice will vary for different types of information, but the criteria assessed in the data retention analysis take into account ongoing business or legal needs for the information, for example in relation to tax, health and safety, and potential or actual disputes or investigations.
 More information, including a description of your legal rights, can be found in the “California Privacy Rights” section below.
 ADDITIONAL PRIVACY MANDATORY DISCLOSURES
 We also make the following disclosures for purposes of compliance with California privacy law:
 We collected the following categories of personal information in the last 12 months: identifiers, characteristics of protected classifications and demographic information, commercial information, Internet or other electronic network activity information, geolocation data, audio, electronic, visual or similar information, and inferences drawn from the above.
 The sources of personal information from whom we collected are: directly from our guests, third-party sites or platforms that you link with your registration account, analytics tools, social networks, advertising networks, and third-party services that update or supplement information we hold about you.
 The business or commercial purposes of collecting personal information are as summarized in our “Notice at Collection” section, and as described in more detail in our Privacy Policy under “Use of Your Information by The Walt Disney Family of Companies.”
 We disclosed certain data elements within the following categories of personal information for a business purpose in the last 12 months: identifiers, characteristics of protected classifications and demographic information, commercial information, Internet or other electronic network activity information, geolocation data, audio, electronic, visual or similar information, and inferences drawn from the above. We disclosed each category to business partners, service providers, government entities, and other third parties as described in the “Sharing Your Personal Information with Other Entities” section of the Privacy Policy.
 As defined by applicable law, we “sold” or “shared” certain data elements within the following categories of personal information in the last 12 months: identifiers, demographic information, commercial information, Internet or other electronic network activity information, approximate geolocation, and inferences drawn from the above. We “sold” or “shared” each category to or with entities who provide advertising, marketing, or audience measurement; other online third-party branded tools or functionality (such as maps or video players); and social networks.
 The business or commercial purposes of “selling” or “sharing” personal information is to assist us with advertising, marketing, audience measurement, and other functionality on our digital properties.
 We do not “sell” or “share” the personal information of known minors under 16 years of age.
 We do not use or disclose sensitive personal information for purposes other than those specified in Section 7027(m) of the CCPA regulations.