Generalized seizures are produced by electrical impulses from throughout the entire brain, whereas partial seizures are produced (at least
initially) by a relatively small part of the brain. The part of the brain
generating the seizures is sometimes called the focus.
Generalized Seizures
• The most common and most dramatic is the generalized convulsion, also called the generalized tonic clonic (“grand mal”) seizure. The patient loses consciousness and usually collapses. There
is generalized body stiffening (called the “tonic” phase) for 30 to
60 seconds, followed by violent jerking (the “clonic” phase) for 30
to 60 seconds, after which the patient goes into a deep sleep (the
“postictal” or after-seizure phase). During these seizures, injuries
and accidents may occur, such as tongue biting and urinary incontinence.
• Absence seizures cause a short loss of consciousness (just a few
seconds) with few or no other symptoms. The patient, most often
a child, typically interrupts an activity and stares blankly. These
seizures begin and end abruptly and may occur several times a
day. Patients are usually not aware that they are having a seizure,
except that they may be aware of “losing time.”
• Myoclonic seizures consist of sporadic jerks, usually on both
sides of the body. Patients sometimes describe the jerks as brief
electrical shocks. When violent, these seizures may result in dropping or involuntarily throwing objects.
• Clonic seizures are repetitive, rhythmic jerks that involve both
sides of the body at the same time.
• Tonic seizures are characterized by stiffening of the muscles.
• Atonic seizures consist of a sudden and general loss of muscle
tone, particularly in the arms and legs, which often result in a fall.
Partial Seizures
Partial seizures are divided into simple, complex, and those that
evolve into (secondary) generalized seizures. The difference between
simple and complex partial seizures is that during simple partial
seizures, patients retain awareness; during complex partial seizures,
they lose awareness.
• Simple partial seizures are further subdivided into four categories according to the nature of their symptoms: motor, sensory,
autonomic or psychological.
o Motor symptoms include movements such as jerking and stiffening.
o Sensory symptoms caused by seizures involve unusual sensations affecting any of the five senses (vision, hearing, smell,
taste or touch).
o When simple partial seizures cause sensory symptoms only
(and no motor symptoms), they are called “auras.”
o The only common autonomic symptom is a peculiar sensation in the stomach that is experienced by many patients with
temporal lobe epilepsy.
o Finally, simple partial seizures with psychological symptoms
are characterized by various experiences involving memory
(the sensation of deja-vu), emotions (such as fear or pleasure),
or other complex psychological phenomena.
• Complex partial seizures, by definition, include impairment of
awareness. Patients seem to be “out of touch,” “out of it” or “staring into space” or “in a trance” during these seizures. There are
often odd movements called automatisms, which are involuntary but coordinated movements that tend to be purposeless and
repetitive. Common automatisms include lip smacking, chewing,
fidgeting and walking.
• The third kind of partial seizure is one that begins as a focal
seizure and evolves into a generalized convulsive (“tonic clonic”)
seizure.
Most types of seizures occur in different types of epilepsy, and most
patients with epilepsy experience more than one seizure type. This
is because seizures are only symptoms. Therefore, it is essential that
your neurologist diagnose your type of EPILEPSY, not just the type(s)
of SEIZURE you are having.
Epilepsy can be divided into two broad categories: idiopathic and
symptomatic. Idiopathic epilepsy is caused by genetic factors, as opposed to brain damage. Symptomatic epilepsy is caused by physical
defects in the brain. Based on the type of seizure affecting the patient,
idiopathic and symptomatic epilepsies can be further categorized.
Type 1: Idiopathic Generalized Epilepsy
• This is a genetic and inherited group of disorders, so there is often, but not always, a family history of epilepsy.
• Idiopathic generalized epilepsy tends to appear during childhood
or adolescence, although it may not be diagnosed until adulthood.
• In this type of epilepsy, there are no nervous system abnormalities
other than the seizures; the brain is structurally normal.
• People with idiopathic generalized epilepsy have normal intelligence, and the results of the neurological examination and brain
scan are normal.
• The results of the electroencephalogram (EEG - a test which measures electrical impulses in the brain) are also normal, except for
the discharges associated with epilepsy.
• The types of seizures affecting patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy may include myoclonic, absence, and generalized
tonic-clonic seizures, with one type predominating. Idiopathic
generalized epilepsy is usually treated with medications and is
a condition that is commonly outgrown, as in childhood absence
epilepsy.
Type 2: Idiopathic Partial Epilepsies
• Idiopathic partial epilepsy begins in childhood (between ages 5
and 8) and runs in families.
• Also known as benign focal epilepsy of childhood or benign Rolandic epilepsy, this is one of the mildest types of epilepsy.
• It is almost always outgrown by puberty and is never diagnosed
in adults.
• Seizures tend to occur during sleep and are most often simple
partial motor seizures that involve the face and secondarily generalized (grand mal) seizures.
Type 3: Symptomatic Generalized Epilepsy
• This is caused by widespread brain damage, and injury during
birth is the most common cause.
• When the cause of symptomatic general epilepsy cannot be identified, the disorder may be referred to as cryptogenic epilepsy.
• Specific, inherited brain diseases, such as adrenoleukodystrophy
(ADL, which was featured in the movie “Lorenzo’s Oil”), or brain
infections (such as meningitis and encephalitis) can also cause
symptomatic generalized epilepsy.
• In addition to seizures, these patients often have other neurological problems, such as developmental delay, mental retardation or
cerebral palsy.
• These epilepsies include different subtypes—the most typical is
the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Multiple types of seizures (generalized tonic-clonic, tonic, myoclonic, tonic, atonic and absence
seizures) are common and can be difficult to control.
Type 4: Symptomatic Partial Epilepsy
• This is the most common type of epilepsy to begin in adulthood.
• It is caused by a localized abnormality of the brain, which can result from strokes, tumors, trauma, scarring or “sclerosis” of brain
tissue (common in the temporal lobe), cysts or infections.
• Sometimes these brain abnormalities can be seen on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) scans, but often they cannot be identified, despite repeated attempts, because they are microscopic.
• When the cause of symptomatic partial epilepsy cannot be identified, the disorder may be referred to as cryptogenic epilepsy.
The diagnosis is based on:
• The patient’s medical history, including any family history of
seizures, associated medical conditions and current medications.
Some important questions you will be asked include:
o At what age did the seizures begin?
o What circumstances surrounded your first seizure?
o What factors seem to bring on the seizures?
o What do you feel before, during and after the seizures?
o How long do the seizures last?
o Have you been treated for epilepsy before? What medications were prescribed and in what dosages? Was the treatment effective?
o Others who have often seen you before, during and after
seizures, such as family and close friends, should be present to provide details of your seizures if they involve loss
of consciousness.
• A complete physical and neurological examination —your muscle strength, reflexes, eye sight, hearing and ability to detect various sensations are tested so your doctors can better understand
the cause of your seizures
• An electroencephalogram (EEG), which measures electrical impulses in the brain.
o This is the only test that directly detects electrical activity
in the brain, and seizures are defined by abnormal electrical activity in the brain. During an EEG, electrodes (small
metal disks) are attached to specific locations on your
head. The electrodes are attached to a monitor to record
the brain’s electrical activity. The EEG is useful not only to
confirm a diagnosis of epilepsy, but also to determine the
type of epilepsy.
o A routine EEG only records about 20 minutes of brain
waves (however, the routine EEG procedure takes about
90 minutes). Because 20 minutes is such a short amount of
time, the results of routine EEG studies are often normal,
even in people known to have epilepsy. Therefore, prolonged EEG monitoring may be necessary. Prolonged
o EEG-video monitoring is an even better diagnostic method. During this type of monitoring, an EEG monitors the
brain’s activity and cameras videotape body movements
and behavior during a seizure. Prolonged monitoring
often requires the patient to spend time in a special facility
for several days. Prolonged EEG-video monitoring is the
only definitive way to diagnose epilepsy.
• Imaging studies of the brain, such as those provided by magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). This can identify the cause of the seizures, but the vast majority of patients with epilepsy have normal
MRIs.