❚ MadeForMums reviews are independent and based on expertise and testing.
When you buy through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission,
but this never influences our product choices.
8 of the best bedside cribs and cosleepers for safe sleeping for your baby
We've tried, tested and reviewed the best bedside cribs, for a
brilliant way to sleep closely and safely with your baby
Gemma Cartwright
Published: March 5, 2024 at 3:20 PM
Save
A bedside crib is one of the most popular choices for newborn sleep, as it
allows you to keep your baby close while still following safe sleep
We value your privacy
We need your consent so that we and our 172 trusted partners can store and access cookies, unique
identifiers, personal data, and information on your browsing behaviour on this device. This only applies to
Immediate Media. You can change your preferences at any time by clicking on ‘Manage Privacy Settings’
located at the bottom of any page. You don’t have to agree, but some personalised content and advertising
may not work if you don’t. We and our partners use your data for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Precise geolocation data, and identification through device scanning
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and
services development.
Google Consent Mode framework
To view our list of partners and see how your data may be used, click or tap ‘More Options’ below. You can
also review where our partners claim a legitimate interest to use your data and, if you wish, object to them
using it.
MORE OPTIONS AGREE
guidelines. In the first 6 months, when the risk of sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS) is at its highest, the safest place for a baby to sleep is on
their back in their own sleep space, be that a cot, crib or moses basket.
Advertisement
A bedside crib fastens to the frame of your bed on one side, so you're
effectively lying next to your baby. The side can usually be dropped down
so you can see and reach over to your child. They're sometimes referred
to as side-sleepers or co-sleepers, but the key difference is that you're not
sharing a sleep surface or bedding. You and your baby can maximise the
soothing benefits that proximity brings while minimising the risks
associated with bed sharing. Having your baby at arm's reach also makes
night feeds much easier.
Best bedside cribs and co-sleepers at a glance
Jump to our list of the best bedside cribs and cosleepers
•
Best bedside crib with an easy drop-down side: Chicco Next2Me
Magic, £189
•
Best bedside crib with a removable bassinet: SnuzPod 4 Bedside
Crib, £199.95
•
Best bedside crib for smooth rocking: Tutti Bambini CoZee Air
Bedside Crib, £225
•
Best bedside crib for longevity: Shnuggle Air Bedside Crib, £180 •
There are a wide range of options, so at MadeForMums we’ve analysed
the bedside crib market closely to bring you the very best choices. We’ve
used feedback from our expert journalist reviewers and parent testers,
combined with results from in-house MadeForMums testing, which looked
at key features such as breathability, mattress firmness, ease of building
as well as functionality.
For each bedside crib we’ve listed the key technical features to help you
compare across brands and models so you can find the best design to suit
your needs.
If your baby is struggling to sleep through the night, take a look at our best
sleep aids and white noise machines, best nightlights and best baby
swaddles.
More like this
Silver Cross Voyager Co-Sleeper Bedside Crib
review
What is the new safety standard for bedside cribs?
All new bedside cribs manufactured since November 2020 have to meet a
new safety standard (with the catchy name BS EN 1130:2019) that
introduced new and more rigorous safety requirements for bedside cribs.
However, you may find some older versions of cribs are still on sale that
only match the previous safety standard. Slowly these will disappear from
stores and the only ones available will meet the new standard.
The most significant new requirement for BS EN 1130:2019 is for a 120mm
Best bedside crib for extra storage: Maxi-Cosie Iora Bedside
Sleeper, £149
•
Best bedside crib for one-handed operation: Joie Roomie GO, £180 •
Best value bedside crib: Red Kite Cozysleep Bedside Crib, £84.99 •
Best bedside crib with 360° swivel: Halo BassiNest Premiere Swivel
Sleeper, £248.29
•
high barrier to be present around the sides of the crib, to ensure your
baby is not able to roll off their own mattress onto yours. This means that
new bedside cribs can no longer have complete drop-down sides – many
now have 'half-height' walls instead.
This allows your baby to be positioned next to you with the crib lined up to
your bed, but their mattress will be sunk a little lower, providing more of a
protective barrier. All the cribs featured in our list comply with these new
BS EN 1130:2019 safety requirements.
What to look for when buying a bedside crib
Will it work with your bed? – Certain bed frames can be trickier to use
with a bedside crib. For example, if you have a divan bed you will need
longer straps, and may not be able to tuck the legs of the crib underneath
the bed and may need to look for a model that has foldable legs or works
with your bed style.
Height of your bed – Most bedside cribs have adjustable heights to give
you an almost perfect fit on most bed frames, but if your bed is
particularly low or high, do check the measurements. Also check the size
of the crib and whether it will fit next to your bed while allowing you to get
in and out easily and safely. This is particularly important for those first
few days and weeks after giving birth when your body is still recovering.
Mattress – The mattress needs to be firm, flat and breathable – this is a
key safety feature. Don’t be tempted by a super soft mattress – your baby
will sleep deeply and most importantly safely on a firm mattress.
Drop-down side – How easy is it to remove the side? Can you do it with
one hand? As you may be doing this in the middle of the night, are there
lots of noisy zips and clips? Can it safely be left down while you sleep? Do
check this as the rules differ depending on the product.
How easy is it to assemble – Are there lots of parts to screw together? Will
you need 2 people to build it? We’ve tested how easy different bedside
cribs are to build in our reviews.
How easy is it to keep clean – Does the mattress have a waterproof cover
to protect from leaky nappies, baby sick and dribbles? Is the fabric
machine washable or will you have to hand wash it?
Portability – Is the crib light enough to move around your house? If you
want to take it away with you does it crib fold flat and/or come with a
storage bag?
Extra features – Does it rock (useful for fussy sleepers), tilt (remember to
use tilting with care), detach to become a moses basket or turn into an
older baby cot or playpen? These extra features may not be necessary, but
they could be useful.
For more safety information we've also covered breathability, bedding and
how to use the tilting function here.
What are the benefits of using a bedside crib?
Safe sleep charity The Lullaby Trust, advises that the safest place for your
baby to sleep is on their own sleep surface, in the same room as you, for
at least the first 6 months. Bedside cribs allow you to have your baby
sleeping right next to you at night, but in the safety of their own crib. This
means you can still be close to your baby without bed-sharing, which
carries a risk of suffocation and overheating.
Bedside cribs enable you to lean over and easily pick up your baby when
feeding at night. This is especially useful if you’ve had a difficult birth or a
c-section and find getting out of bed painful. You can also easily comfort
your baby if they are fussing and have a good view of them while they are
sleeping.
How to do the baby mattress firmness test
Press your hand on the centre and the sides of the mattress •
A firm mattress shouldn’t mould to the shape of your hand and
you’ll feel resistance – it will obviously move beneath the
pressure but your hand shouldn’t sink in
•
When you remove your hand, the mattress should snap back
and regain its shape
•
From a practical perspective, bedside cribs are smaller and more compact
than most cots, which means they take up less space in your bedroom
than a full-sized cot or cotbed.
Do I need a bedside crib for my baby?
You don’t have to buy a bedside crib. It's completely safe to put a baby in a
regular cot from birth. But they’re a great option if you want your baby as
close to you as possible at night, and for saving space. The downside is
that most of these cribs only last up to 6 months and you’ll then need to
move your baby into a full-sized cot or cotbed. A moses basket is a more
economical option, but these can last even less time, and do not have the
added features of a bedside crib such as a drop-down side, tilt, or multiple
heights.
How much does a bedside crib cost?
It is possible to buy budget bedside cribs for under £100 but the majority
we have reviewed are between £150-£300. Certain features, such as a
rocking function or one-handed drop down side, tend to push the price up
slightly.
How did we choose these bedside cribs?
Our 10 of the Best lists are compiled by qualified and experienced
parenting journalists. They rely on a number of sources, including our
independent reviews, testing undertaken during the MadeForMums
Awards, and feedback from our home testing panel and Top Testers
Club. Each year thousands of products are put through their paces by
hundreds of parents across the country on behalf of MadeForMums,
to ensure we’re bringing you honest and true reviews and
recommendations.
When testing bedside cribs, we consider size, ease of build and fitting,
mattress quality and breathability, ease and safety of the drop-down
side mechanism and other features, comfort for baby, design and
quality, and whether it's worth the money.
Our list is not an ordered ranking from 1-10, instead it is a carefully
Here are our top 10 bedside cribs for 2024
1. Chicco Next2Me Magic, £189
– Best for easy drop-down side
Suitable from: Birth to 6 months/9kg | Weight: 13.1kg | Crib size: H66.5-
82.4cm x W73cm x L99.5cm | Mattress size: L83cm x W50.5cm | Tilt: Yes
| Rocks: Yes | Height positions: 11 | Washable mattress cover: Hand
wash
The Chicco Next2Me Magic is the latest update to the original Next2Me
side-sleeping crib, which has won fans for its versatility. It can be used
from birth as a bedside co-sleeper, as a standalone crib or possibly as a
travel cot, but at over 13kg it's not a light carry.
It is slightly more expensive than some other models, but standout
features include a really easy drop-side that can be operated with one
hand, 11 height levels, a lockable rocking function, 4 tilt options to help
reduce reflux, and wheels to make it easy to move around your home.
selected group of tried-and-tested products, each of which we believe
is best for a different situation or requirement. We don’t just tell you
what is best, we help you discover what is best for your family.
A large sleeping area means more room for a bigger baby, plus a travel
bag is included.
MFM tester Lucy said, “I found the Chicco Next2Me Magic a breeze to
move around and set up, but also substantial and sturdy. The clever onehanded drop-down mechanism on the side panel can be used while
holding your baby in your arms, which is brilliant.
"I've even used the Chicco in my kitchen for safe day naps when I need to
be more focused on my older child.”
Pros: Firm and breathable mattress, retractable legs to fit any bed, quiet
side zip, easy to transport
Cons: Tricky to initially assemble, mattress cover is hand wash only
Read our full MadeForMums Chicco Next2Me Magic bedside crib review
Available from: John Lewis and Mamas & Papas
John Lewis & Partners £229.00 Buy now
Mamas & Papas £229.00 Buy now
2. SnuzPod 4 Bedside Crib, £199.95
– Best for removable bassinet
Suitable from: Birth to 6 months/9kg | Weight: 11.5kg | Crib size: H95cm
x W49cm x L100cm | Mattress size: L75cm x W40cm | Tilt: Yes | Rocks:
Yes | Height positions: 7 | Washable mattress cover: Machine washable
The latest iteration of Snuz's much-loved bedside crib, the Snuzpod4
features a new breathable system (called ComfortAir) that aids the flow of
air around the crib and your baby. It offers more side vents, breathable
mesh liner and mattress, plus a ventilated base.
But the key thing that we're delighted to see is that the Snuzpod4 has a
firmer mattress than previous versions – as well as good breathability.
Plus Snuz claims that the SnuzPod4 fits more bed heights than any rival, as
it will now work with beds up to a maximum adult mattress height of
73cm. It's also designed to be compatible with a range of bed types –
divan, ottoman and framed bed bases.
Made from sustainably sourced beech solid wood, the Snuzpod4 looks
good. MFM mum home tester Mehack commented on "how stylish and
contemporary the design is," praising how it "fits perfectly with the room
decor".
We love its versatility – the two-part design includes a lift-off bassinet that
can be moved around the house so you have a portable safe sleeping
space for your baby, whichever room you're in. The bassinet also has a
manual rocking function, as does the crib and the bassinet. There's an
optional riser that can be added to create a slight incline to help babies
with reflux, but for safety reasons, when the cot is tilted this stops the
rocking function from working.
Pros: Stylish, removable bassinet, great storage
Cons: Can be difficult to put together
Read our full MadeForMums SnuzPod 4 bedside crib review
Available from: Snuz, Samuel Johnston and Amazon
Very.co.uk £159.99 Buy now
Samuel Johnston £190.18 Buy now
Amazon UK £199.95 Buy now
John Lewis & Partners £199.95 Buy now
3. Tutti Bambini CoZee Air Bedside Crib, £225
– Best for smooth rocking
Suitable from: Birth to 6 months/9kg | Weight: 11kg | Crib size: H92cm x
W12cm x L56cm | Mattress size: L80.5cm x W51cm | Tilt: Yes | Rocks: Yes
| Height positions: 6 | Washable mattress cover: Sponge, only machine
wash if necessary
While it is at the more expensive end of the market, what makes the
CoZee Air stand out from the competition is its smooth rocking function. It
comes with easy-to-remove caster wheels that you can switch with rocking
bars, which easily attach to the legs of the crib. As a safety feature, the
CoZee can also only be rocked when it is set up as a standalone crib –
when used as a bedside crib, it has flip-out feet that prevent it from doing
so. “The rocking feature is fantastic and really helped me to settle my baby
when she was overtired and fussing,” said MFM tester Tara.
MFM testers also rated the crib highly for its portability – it is ideal as a
travel cot, as despite its large size, it is compact when folded. A 30-second
open-fold mechanism allows for a quick set up and it comes with a travel
bag for easy transportation.
While the multiple mesh windows are great for breathability and being
able to see your little one, there's a curtain attached to one side of the crib
that you can roll down to protect your baby from draughts during colder
months. This still leaves one mesh side open to allow for plenty of air flow.
When it comes to cleaning, the fabric lining can be removed and put in the
washing machine, while the foam mattress can be machine washed if
necessary. We also like the addition of a storage shelf that is useful for
holding essentials such as baby wipes, nappies, clothes and muslins.
Pros: Smooth rocking, quick to collapse down, storage shelf
Cons: Higher price point
Read our full MadeForMums Tutti Bambini CoZee Air Bedside Crib review
Available from: Boots, Kiddies Kingdom and Tutti Bambini
Kiddies Kingdom £165.00 Buy now
For Your Little One £180.00 Buy now
Wayfair £186.63 Buy now
Dunelm £219.00 Buy now
4. Shnuggle Air Bedside crib, £180
– Best for longevity
Suitable from: Birth to 6 months/9kg (up to 2 years with conversion kit) |
Weight: 13.4kg | Crib size: H68.5–83cm x W56cm x L94cm | Mattress size:
L83cm x W50cm | Tilt: Yes | Rocks: No | Height positions: 7 | Washable
mattress cover: Hand wash
While most bedside cribs on the market are only suitable for babies up to
6 months old, the Shnuggle Air stands out by offering 3 products in 1. It
can be used as a standalone cot or bedside sleeper and then it transforms
after 6 months into a full-sized cot when you buy the additional
conversion kit (£109.95) and cot mattress (£50), which will last your child
up until around 2 years old. This makes it a great long-term investment.
MFM judges and testers were particularly impressed with the firmness of
its hypo-allergenic airflow mattress. This crib has dual-view mesh sides,
giving it maximum breathability; this also means you can easily see your
baby when both sides are up. This was also a feature that stood out to
MFM reviewer Tara, who used it with her 6-month-old daughter Elodie.
She said, “Elodie slept very soundly and she loved being able to see
through the mesh sides.”
The drop-down sides are easily removed for nighttime access by releasing
the safety catch on the top bar and undoing the zips. However, during the
awards testing, it was noted that the safety catch makes a loud click. This
was echoed by a MFM user reviewer who said: “The side makes a noise
when you click it back in and that can wake up baby!” Unlike most of the
others on this list, the side of the Shnuggle Air cannot be left down during
sleep, it's simply there for access.
The Shnuggle Air is relatively heavy at 13.4kg, and doesn't have wheels, so
it's not easy to move around your home. “I’d say once the Shnuggle Air is
set up, it’s staying put,” Tara added.
Pros: Long-lasting, highly breathable, spacious
Cons: Not easily portable, side is noisy when released, hand wash only
Read our full MadeForMums Shnuggle Air Bedside Crib review
Available from: Amazon, John Lewis and Shnuggle
John Lewis & Partners £180.00 Buy now
Amazon UK £199.95 Buy now
Kiddies Kingdom £299.00 Buy now
5. Maxi-Cosi Iora bedside sleeper, £149
– Best for extra storage
Suitable from: Birth to 6 months/9kg | Weight: 10.8kg | Crib size:
H74.5cm x W55.5cm x L93cm | Mattress size: L80cm x W58.5cm | Tilt: Yes
| Rocks: No | Height positions: 5 | Washable mattress cover: Hand wash
With its choice of muted colours, sleek design and quality materials, the
Maxi-Cosi Iora is sure to fit in with most room schemes. The large storage
basket at the bottom of the crib is great for parents who are short on
space as it can easily hold numerous blankets, baby sleeping bags,
nappies, wipes and spare clothes.
The Iora’s easy-to-adjust height (5 positions in total) and slide function (2
positions in total) also means it can fit snugly against most types of bed
when used with the straps. “Our iron-frame bed is somewhat lower than
average,” said MFM reviewer Georgina. “But the Iora also sat in the correct
position with our mattress.”
One feature that our reviewer Georgina particularly liked was that when
the side is down, there is a 7-inch (18cm) barrier to stop your baby rolling
out. She said: “The Iora allowed me to sleep as close to my daughter as
possible, but I was also safe in the knowledge that she was in her own
sleeping area and I wasn't going to squash her!”
This crib is extremely straightforward to assemble (one of the quickest
during MFM testing) and MFM reviewer Georgina managed to put it
together speedily without using the instructions. She explained: “It was
obvious which pieces go together, simple to build and had neat zips to
keep everything in place.” A handy bag also means it can easily be used as
a travel cot, especially as it folds down flat. Keep in mind that Georgina did
find the outer fabric was prone to creasing when unpacked from the travel
bag.
Pros: Extra storage, easy height and slide adjustments, portable, smart
appearance
Cons: Mattress cover hand wash only, outer fabric prone to creasing, not
as many height options as other cribs, only mesh on one side
Read our full MadeForMums Maxi-Cosi Iora review
Available from: Samuel Johnston, John Lewis and Amazon
Kiddies Kingdom £169.00 Buy now
John Lewis & Partners £199.99 Buy now
Mamas & Papas £199.99 Buy now
Very.co.uk £199.99 Buy now
6. Joie Roomie GO, £180
– Best for one-handed operation
Suitable from: Birth to 6 months/9kg | Weight: 9.5kg | Crib size: H74.8-
82.2cm x W68.5cm x L90.3cm | Mattress size: H6cm x W51cm x L84cm |
Tilt: Yes | Rocks: No | Height positions: 5 | Washable mattress cover:
Machine washable | Awards: Gold – Bedside/Co-Sleeper Crib,
MadeForMum Awards 2023
Awarded Gold in Best Bedside/Co-Sleeper Crib, MadeForMums Awards
2023, the Joie Roomie Go packs in a lot of features for its mid-range price.
Offering mesh windows on both sides, providing plenty of ventilation as
well as making it easy to keep an eye on your baby, the stylish crib is
available in a choice of chic grey or classic black. Our MFM home testers
were impressed with the Roomie Go’s aesthetic, with one commenting, “It
looks great, is made with good quality material and will look stylish in any
room.”
The one-handed drop-down panels on both sides of the crib mean you
can easily switch which side of the bed you attach it to. You should be able
to simply click the handle to lift and lower, although one of our home
testers commented that the first couple of times they attempted this the
mechanism was a little sticky.
Its simple, compact fold means you can pack the crib away in less than a
minute and take it with you in the travel bag included, for holidays or trips
to the grandparents’.
The Joie Roomie Go is also on (lockable) wheels so you can move it around
the home during the daytime. It has a tummy tilt for reflux/colic, and there
are 5 height adjustments to fit most beds. Praised across the board by our
MFM home testers for its comfy mattress and ease of assembly, it’s a great
all-rounder both when at home and away.
Pros: One-handed operation, tilt function for reflux, comfortable for baby,
drop-down panels on both sides, travel bag included
Cons: No storage, not as many height options as other cribs
Available from: John Lewis, Joie and Argos
Very.co.uk £179.99 Buy now
argos.co.uk £180.00 Buy now
John Lewis & Partners £180.00 Buy now
Kiddies Kingdom £180.00 Buy now
7. Red Kite Cozysleep Crib, £84.99
– Best for value
Suitable from: Birth to 6 months/9kg | Weight: 9kg | Crib size: H74-87cm
x W57-61cm x L88cm | Mattress size: W80cm x L50cm | Tilt: Yes | Rocks:
No | Height positions: 7 | Washable mattress cover: No, wipeable only |
Awards: Silver – Bedside/Co-Sleeper Crib, MadeForMum Awards 2023
Coming in at just under £85 the Red Kite Cozysleep crib offers really
fantastic value. However, the great price doesn't mean there's a
compromise on features or style. “It’s a well-made product that looks
modern and would easily suit all bedrooms,” said MFM home tester Kiran,
who appreciated the simple, yet contemporary look.
The crib has a drop-down side, 7 adjustable height positions, a tilt function
(great for helping with reflux) and a handy storage shelf for things like
nappies and wipes. It's on wheels, so it can be moved around the room or
away from the bed with ease, and it also folds down to a more compact
size for travel. There’s even a handy storage bag included, which our
testers felt helps you to get even more use out of the Cozysleep as a travel
cot.
One feature that really impressed our home testers was the quality of the
soft, quilted mattress, with one MFM home tester commenting, “The
mattress is brilliant! I have used other makes of co-sleepers/cribs and this
mattress is triple the thickness. It feels soft but firm and very comfy.”
Pros: Great value, tilt function, good quality mattress, handy storage shelf,
travel bag included
Cons: Only mesh on one side
Available from: Amazon and Kiddies Kingdom
Kiddies Kingdom £79.99 Buy now
Samuel Johnston £104.40 Buy now
8. Halo BassiNest Premiere Swivel Sleeper, £248.29
– Best for 360° swivel
Suitable from: Birth to 5 months/10kg | Weight: 14.8kg | Crib size:
H94cm x W61cm x L114cm | Mattress size: L85cm x W55.8cm | Tilt: No |
Rocks: Battery-powered vibrations | Height positions: Customisable
between 61cm-84cm | Washable mattress cover: Machine-washable
sheet included
This is American brand Halo's updated version of its popular BassiNest
Essentia swivel sleeper. Offering a slightly different way to sleep closely
but safely with your baby, the BassiNest Premiere is a standalone crib with
a central stand that slides beneath the bed, rather than fastening on to
the side of the bed.
Parents can then swivel the crib 360° for easy access, with one MFM home
tester pointing out this also "makes it easy to get in and out of bed without
disturbing the baby". There's no drop-down side, instead the mesh side
has enough give that you can push it down to reach and get your baby
before it automatically returns to the upright position.
Compared to cribs with open sides that sit flush with the bed, the
BassiNest is more of a hybrid product, sitting somewhere between a
moses basket and a bedside crib. While the BassiNest Premiere doesn't
have a rock or tilt function, it does have a built-in “soothing centre” that
features an amber nightlight, floorlight, 2 vibration levels and 4 soothing
sounds, all with auto shutoff. To use this function you will need 3 x AA
batteries (not included).
Pros: Flexible, useful when recovering from birth, customisable height to
fit most beds, built-in soothing centre
Cons: Not a true bedside crib, very heavy, need batteries to access the
soothing centre functions, expensive
Available from: Halo, John Lewis and Boots
John Lewis & Partners £249.00 Buy now
How do you use a bedside crib safely?
The most important piece of advice for safe sleeping is to lie your baby on
their back to sleep. Indeed, since the Back To Sleep campaign was
launched in the UK 30 years ago, cases of SIDS (Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome) have fallen by 80%.
When using a bedside crib, you should ensure there is no gap between the
adult's and baby's mattress. Your baby’s mattress should be firm and flat,
and sit snugly in the crib with no gaps.
Also look for a mattress that is breathable. There's a simple test you can
do for this:
Most cribs come with a mattress as standard, but if you are given the crib
by someone else or buy one second-hand you will need to buy a new
mattress – even if the existing one appears to be in good condition.
Second-hand mattresses may increase the risk of SIDS and are less likely
to be supportive after losing their shape over time. Always use the
mattress designed to fit your bedside crib – most retailers sell them
separately should you need a replacement.
When it comes to a safe sleeping position, place your baby in the crib with
their feet at the end of the crib – called the feet-to-foot position. This
reduces the risk of their face or head slipping down under the covers if
you're using a blanket.
How to use tilting and rocking features safely
Some bedside cribs offer a tilt option, which may help babies with
digestive issues, colic or reflux. If you are going to tilt your baby, you must
do so with great care and only at a slight angle, to avoid your baby slipping
down. We recommend speaking to your GP or health visitor for advice
before using the tilt function.
Tilting (and rocking) can only be used when the bedside crib is set up as a
Our at-home mattress breathability test
Pick up the mattress and place it close to your mouth •
Breathe in and see how easy it is to breathe out with the
mattress near your mouth
•
If it’s easier this should mean the mattress offers good
ventilation
•
standalone crib – for safety reasons, you should not tilt or rock the crib
when the side is down as there is a chance your baby could fall out.
What bedding can I use with a bedside crib?
The Lullaby Trust advises, “Firmly tucked-in sheets and blankets (not above
shoulder height) or a baby sleep bag are safe for a baby to sleep in.” Make
sure you buy the correct size sheets that exactly fit your mattress. You
may also choose to swaddle a newborn. The Lullaby Trust does not advise
for or against swaddling, but it does have some basic swaddling guidance.
You must stop using a swaddle as soon as your baby learns to roll.
Not all baby sleeping bags and swaddles are created equal, so make sure
the brand you buy adheres to safety standards, is the correct tog for the
room temperature and season, and is the right size for your baby, so they
can't slip down inside.
Don’t use any soft or bulky bedding and never use pillows, duvets, baby
bumpers or baby positioners. You should also remove any soft toys from
the crib before your baby sleeps.
Advertisement
Read more...
Gemma Cartwright
Group Digital Editor
Gemma has two decades of experience in digital content. She is mum to a
preschooler, and aunt to 4 children under 4. She is particularly passionate about
sleep (for babies and parents) and loves testing out gadgets, technology and
innovation in the parenting world.
14 of the best baby and toddler sleeping bags •
14 of the best car seats from birth •
Bednest: NCT says there is a “small but plausible risk” when using the
co-sleeper
•
You may also like
How NatPat's wellness patches may help your family
NatPat's range of wellness patches and stickers aim to tackle
everything from allergies to lack of focus. We take a closer look at the
range.
Advertisement feature with NatPat
Read now
Silver Cross Voyager Co-Sleeper Bedside Crib review
Chicco Next2Me Air bedside crib review
Cribs & moses baskets
Cribs & moses baskets
Mamas & Papas Lua Bedside Crib review
10 of the best Moses baskets and cribs for your
newborn
Cribs & moses baskets
Cribs & moses baskets
About us Contact us Terms & conditions Code of conduct Privacy policy
Cookies policy Complaints MadeForMums Top Testers Club Competitions
Manage Privacy Settings
This website is owned and published by Immediate Media Company Limited.
www.immediate.co.uk
© Immediate Media Company Ltd. 2024
Radio Times BBC Good Food
Gardeners' World Magazine olive
History Extra Junior Magazine
The Recommended
Baby Names Pregnancy Health
Pushchairs & prams Car Seats
Weaning & Baby Recipes Travel & holidays