Palantir reported its Q2 FY24 earnings, where total revenue grew 27% YoY to $678M beating estimates. Out of the $678M in revenue, Government revenue accounted for roughly 55% of Total Revenue, growing 23% YoY. But the main hero of this growth story is its Commercial segment which is growing at a faster rate of 33% YoY and accounting for a growing share of Total Revenue when we compare it to the prior year.
 

 Particularly, when it comes to the Commercial revenue segment, its US market saw a growth rate of 55% YoY to $159M. While it saw a slowdown in its growth pace on a sequential basis to 6%, its annual growth rate indicates a reacceleration in trend, boosting investor optimism. This was driven by persistent demand for their enterprise platform, AIP (Artificial Intelligence Platform), that makes artificial capabilities useful to large organizations, providing them with a structural advantage over their competitors.
 What is even more impressive is that over 4 years ago, Palantir had just 14 commercial customers in the US. With the launch of AIP over a year ago, its US commercial customer count stands at 295, growing 83% YoY, as it captures the enterprise AI opportunity as the management claims that they solve the “prototype to production” problem like no other company.
 In Q2, the company closed 96 Commercial deals with at least $1M of TCV (Total Contract Value), which grew 45% YoY and 10% QoQ. However, with a closer look at this data point, we can see that the company saw a sequential acceleration in its $5M and $10M deals, which grew 22% and 80% QoQ to 33 and 27 respectively. This is driven by a combination of a higher volume of existing customers signing expansion deals with deepening product-level relationships as well as new customer acquisition where they leverage their go-to-market motion of bootcamps and pilots to accelerate customer journey towards high-value production use cases, with TCV growing 152% YoY in the US Commercial segment.
 At the same time, Palantir and Microsoft (MSFT) also announced a significant advancement in their partnership in August, where Palantir will deploy their suite of products in Microsoft Azure Government and in the Azure Government Secret and Top Secret Clouds, enabling operators to safely and responsibly build AI-driven operational workloads across Defense and Intelligence verticals for the US government. This should further drive deeper adoption of AIP in the federal sector, thus boosting the top line.
 

 Shifting gears to profitability, Palantir generated $254M in Adjusted Operating income, which grew 88% YoY with a margin expansion of 1200 basis points to 37%. Simultaneously, the company also achieved GAAP operating profitability for the sixth consecutive quarter with a GAAP operating margin of 16%, up 1400 basis points YoY. It is incredible that operating expenses just grew just 6% YoY for the magnitude of revenue growth. In other words, it saw its revenue growth accelerate while expanding margins at the same time, unlocking the “holy grail” in the world of SaaS with a Rule of 40 score from 57 in Q1 to 64 in Q2.
 I believe that this is made possible by its go-to-market strategy, which focuses on AIP Bootcamps and AIPCon that leverages the strength of its product to unlock potential client AI use cases instead of hoarding large numbers of salespeople. So far, with this strategy, it is seeing a steady increase in the number of clients along with existing clients expanding their usage of the platform, with the 12-month revenue from Top 20 customers growing 9% YoY to $57M/customer, thus enabling it to unlock operating leverage.