2. 
 The Frye ruling refers only to the character of the “scientific principle” proffered as evidence. Frye makes no mention of subject-matter expertise (27), except in the sense implied by the “general acceptance” clause, which refers to the consensual expertise held by the scientific community. This concept of consensual expertise as the basis for establishing trustworthiness became eroded through establishment of the Federal Rules of Evidence, which turned the focus toward opinions of individual experts.
 Rule 702: Testimony by Experts
 By the 1970s, a sense had emerged that the inflexible Frye requirement for general acceptance was difficult to establish and perhaps insufficient, in that it was mainly relevant to criminal cases in which an invented instrument was proposed to establish fact.# Partly in response to this concern, standards for admissibility of scientific evidence began to change. They did so initially, at least in a formal sense, following recommendations of a federal advisory committee of the United States Judicial Conference, which was established for the broader purpose of normalizing and codifying rules for the use of evidence in US Courts. The Federal Rules of Evidence became law in 1975 by act of Congress. The particular rule that bears on admissibility of expert testimony is known as Rule 702 (28).
 While Frye selectively targets the use of scientific evidence, Rule 702 applies more generally to expert testimony on “scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge,” meaning that the same standards apply to evidence drawn from the well of scientific knowledge and to subject-matter experts in nonscience knowledge domains, such as tugboat captaining. In its original form, Rule 702–1975 merely formalized and made into law standards for “helpfulness” and “expert” qualifications, both of which had been less formally applied since the 19th century:
 “If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise.”
 As a notably limp standard for judging the evidentiary nuances of modern science, Rule 702-1975 was subsequently interpreted and clarified by the Supreme Court’s transformative 1993 ruling on scientific evidence in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (8).
 The Daubert Standard
 Unlike the forensic instrument that motivated the Frye standard, in which the question before the court concerned the scientific validity of measured quantities, the Daubert ruling emerged from a toxic tort case, in which scientific evidence attempted to establish cause and effect. Daubert’s civil action was filed against the drug company Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals in 1984, on behalf of two children born with serious birth defects. The mothers had taken the drug Bendectin [doxylamine succinate and pyridoxine hydrochloride (vitamin B6)], which was manufactured by Merrell Dow and widely used for decades to quell nausea and vomiting during first-trimester pregnancy. The plaintiff alleged that Bendectin had caused deformities during gestation. Merrell Dow maintained that there was no scientific evidence of a link between their drug and birth defects, but Daubert recruited an expert in the form of obstetrician William McBride, who was prepared to testify on the teratogenic effects of Bendectin. Noting that McBride’s assertions failed to meet the Frye standard of general acceptance by the scientific community, the District Court for the Southern District of California issued summary judgement in favor of Merrell Dow (29). Daubert appealed to the Ninth Circuit, which upheld the lower court’s ruling (30).
 In response, Daubert went on to argue before the Supreme Court that the common law Frye standard for admissibility of scientific evidence was inapplicable in their case, because it had been replaced in 1975 by the legislatively enacted Rule 702. The Court agreed and upheld Rule 702–1975 as the modern legal standard for admissibility in federal court, superseding the Frye standard.‖ In its ruling (8), the Court provided an interpretation of Rule 702–1975, which is known today as the Daubert standard. This standard consists of a set of clear and useful criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of scientific evidence:
 • 
 whether the theory or technique in question can be (and has been) tested,
 • 
 whether it has been subjected to peer review and publication,
 • 
 its known or potential error rate, and
 • 
 the existence and maintenance of standards controlling its operation, and
 • 
 whether it has attracted widespread acceptance within a relevant scientific community
 Unlike the uncompromising Frye standard, these criteria are intended to be flexibly applied at the discretion of the trial judge.
 With these brief considerations, Daubert strengthened the application of evidence law in several ways that conform to the nature of scientific investigation. Perhaps most importantly, Daubert returned the focus to the body of scientific knowledge (27), highlighting the importance of empirically demonstrating [“can be (and has been) tested”] that a scientific instrument or principle is a valid predictor of the probability that a courtroom hypothesis is correct (“known or potential error rate”). To that end, the focus on widespread or general acceptance of scientific evidence – consistent with Frye but absent from Rule 702 – is notable here, as the scientific consensus at any moment is the rational basis for decision under the unyielding demands of courtroom litigation. Also consistent with Frye and contrary to the letter of Rule 702, Daubert emphasizes the need for evidence to reflect the consensus of the “relevant scientific community.” As highlighted below, the definition of relevance has become a battleground in efforts to reform the use of forensic evidence.
 Rule 702 Evolves
 Rule 702 was substantially amended in 2000 to conform with Daubert and to promote a “more rigorous and structured approach” (31), in which the gatekeeping role was formally handed to judges. The Rule’s emphasis on the expert remained, but three “reliability” requirements were included in Rule 702–2000 (provisions b-d), which place constraints on the data, methods, principles, and their application by the expert:
 A witness who is qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise if:
 

 the expert’s scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will help the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue;
 

 the testimony is based on sufficient facts or data;
 (c) 
 the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods; and
 (d) 
 the expert has reliably applied the principles and methods to the facts of the case.
 Rule 702 was revised again in 2022 (to take effect December 2023) through amendments proposed by the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules and subsequently approved by the US Judicial Conference and the Supreme Court (32). For these efforts, Rule 702–2022 differs from the previous by two small text additions. One defines a preponderance of evidence (“more likely than not”) standard for demonstrating that the four provisions [702(a-d)] have been satisfied, which offers the gatekeeping judge a quantitative criterion for decisions about admissibility. The other clarifies that it is not the expert’s reliable application that matters, but rather that “the expert’s opinion reflects a reliable application,” which grants the trial judge the ability to bar opinions that exceed what can be reasonably concluded from the methods and principles applied.