The DOJ’s Complaint
The DOJ’s complaint alleges that Apple has monopolized markets for “performance smartphones” and
smartphones generally by impeding the development of technologies that threaten to undermine the
iPhone platform. Some of the DOJ’s allegations involve Apple’s control of iPhone app distribution.
Specifically, the complaint asserts that Apple wields its power over app approval to block or marginalize
technologies that may reduce consumers’ dependence on the iPhone. The DOJ also contends that Apple
maintains its monopoly by denying application programming interfaces (APIs) and other access points to
third-party services that would reduce the costs of switching from an iPhone to another smartphone.
The complaint highlights five technologies that Apple has allegedly suppressed using the tactics described
above. These allegations are summarized below.
• Super Apps. The DOJ argues that Apple has thwarted the development of “super apps”—
programs that can serve as platforms for other apps. Super apps are popular in Asian
markets, offering users a suite of services like payments, messaging, and e-commerce
within a single app. The DOJ claims that, by offering a range of services that can be
accessed on different types of devices, super apps threaten to disintermediate the iPhone
and commoditize device hardware. The DOJ alleges that Apple strategically changed its
App Store Guidelines to suppress this threat, effectively preventing apps from hosting the
types of “mini programs” offered by super apps. In particular, the complaint asserts that
Apple imposes restrictions that make it difficult for users to find mini programs. The DOJ
also contends that Apple prevents mini programs from accessing APIs needed to
Congressional Research Service
https://crsreports.congress.gov
LSB11154
Congressional Research Service 2
implement Apple’s in-app payment system, functionally precluding developers from
monetizing such programs.
• Cloud Streaming Apps. The complaint claims that Apple has also suppressed the
development of cloud streaming apps, which allow users to run computationally intensive
programs without storing the programs on their smartphones. By leveraging the
computing power of remote servers, cloud streaming apps facilitate complex programs
like gaming and artificial intelligence services, even if consumers purchase smartphones
with less sophisticated hardware than an iPhone. The DOJ says that Apple is highly
attuned to this threat, quoting an executive’s concern that consumers might buy an
Android device “for 25 bux at a garage sale and . . . have a solid cloud computing device”
that “works fine.”
Apple has allegedly taken several steps to avert this outcome. The complaint contends
that Apple requires developers to submit any cloud streaming game or update as a
standalone app for approval by Apple. Because advanced games often require daily or
hourly updates, the DOJ claims that this requirement presents developers with the
untenable choice of delaying software updates for non-iOS versions of their games or
making the iOS versions incompatible with non-iOS versions. The lawsuit also alleges
that Apple undermines cloud gaming apps in other ways—for example, by requiring
“game overhauls and payment redesigns” that effectively force developers to create
iOS-specific versions of their games instead of a single cross-platform version. As a
result of Apple’s conduct, the DOJ says, no developer has designed a cloud streaming app
for the iPhone.
• Messaging. The complaint alleges that Apple degrades cross-platform messaging in
several ways, which discourages the use of other smartphones. For example, the DOJ
claims that Apple prevents third-party messaging apps from accessing APIs that allow for
the combination of “text to anyone” functionality and the advanced features of “over the
top” (OTT) messaging protocols (e.g., encryption, typing indicators, read receipts, and
the ability to share rich media). As a result, use of a third-party messaging app requires
both the sender and recipient of a message to download the same third-party app. Apple
Messages, by contrast, incorporates “text to anyone” functionality and advanced OTT
features, allowing users to send messages with such features by typing a phone number in
the messaging app’s “To:” field.
The DOJ also alleges that Apple undermines the messaging quality of rival smartphones:
if an iPhone user messages a non-iPhone user via Apple Messages, the text appears in a
green bubble and offers limited functionality. Specifically, these conversations are not
encrypted, videos are lower quality, and users cannot edit messages or see typing
indicators. The complaint claims that Apple takes steps to preserve these disadvantages
for competing smartphones—for example, by refusing to make Apple Messages available
to other smartphones and blocking developers from providing end-to-end encryption for
texts from Apple Messages to Android users.
• Smartwatches. The DOJ also alleges that Apple has suppressed the development of
cross-platform smartwatches, steering consumers to Apple’s smartwatch and thereby
locking them into the iPhone ecosystem. The complaint contends that Apple degrades the
functionality of third-party smartwatches by preventing them from responding to iPhone
notifications, inhibiting them from maintaining reliable connections with iPhones, and
undermining the performance of third-party smartwatches that connect directly with a
cellular network. In doing so, the DOJ says, Apple bolsters its own smartwatch—Apple
Watch—which does not face these disadvantages. Because Apple Watch is not
Congressional Research Service 3
compatible with other smartphones, purchases of Apple Watch raise the costs of
switching from an iPhone to another smartphone. Thus, by favoring Apple Watch and
degrading rival smartwatches, the DOJ claims, Apple helps solidify its smartphone
monopoly.
• Digital Wallets. The DOJ argues that Apple has implemented a similar strategy vis-á-vis
digital wallets, which allow for the storage and use of passes and credentials such as
credit cards, movie tickets, and car keys. The complaint alleges that Apple’s digital
wallet—Apple Wallet—is the only iPhone app that is allowed to access the technology
needed for tap-to-pay functionality, which the DOJ characterizes as the “most important
function for attracting users to a digital wallet.” The DOJ also claims that Apple prevents
rival digital wallets from authenticating digital payment options on online checkout pages
and from serving as alternatives to Apple’s in-app payment tool, further reducing the
attractiveness of rival wallets to consumers. By stifling the emergence of cross-platform
wallets, the lawsuit contends, Apple has suppressed the development of technology that
could reduce the costs of switching from an iPhone to another smartphone.
The complaint asserts that Apple’s conduct amounts to monopolization or, in the alternative, attempted
monopolization of two markets: the U.S. market for “performance smartphones” and a broader U.S.
market for all smartphones. The DOJ argues that “performance smartphones” represent a distinct market
because “entry-level smartphones” made with lower-quality materials and performance components are
not reasonable substitutes for “higher-end” smartphones like the iPhone.
In support of its allegations of monopoly power, the DOJ contends that Apple occupies more than 70% of
the market for “performance smartphones” and more than 65% of the market for smartphones generally,
benefits from substantial barriers to entry and expansion, foregoes innovation without fear of losing
customers, and achieves profit margins that significantly exceed those of rivals.
In alleging anticompetitive effects, the DOJ claims that the conduct described above results in less choice
for smartphone users, harms the quality of the iPhone and rival smartphones, and allows Apple to extract
higher profits from iPhone users and app developers. The complaint rejects the notion that these harms
can be justified on the basis of privacy, security, or other procompetitive benefits. Here, the DOJ argues
that many of the technologies Apple suppresses—for example, apps that would allow Apple Messages to
send encrypted texts to Android devices—would themselves enhance privacy and security. The lawsuit
contends that Apple’s selective invocation of privacy and security underscores the pretextual nature of
those defenses.