Direct Certification
Direct certification is a process through which state agencies and school districts automatically
certify children for free meals based on documentation of the child’s status in a program or
category without the need for a household application.74 States are required to conduct direct 
certification with SNAP and have the option of conducting direct certification with the other
programs and categories that convey categorical eligibility.
For SNAP and other federal programs, the direct certification process typically involves state
agencies (e.g., state SNAP and state educational agencies) cross-checking program rolls.75 A list
of matched children is sent to the school district, which certifies children for free meals without
the need for a household application.76 For foster, homeless, migrant, and runaway children,
direct certification typically involves school district communication with a local or state official
who can provide documentation of the child’s status in one of these categories.77
The 2004 child nutrition reauthorization act (P.L. 108-265) required states to conduct direct
certification with SNAP, with nationwide implementation taking effect in school year 2008-2009.
As of school year 2018-2019 (the most recent data available), USDA reported that 98% of
children in SNAP households were directly certified for free school meals.78
The HHFKA made further policy changes to expand direct certification. One of those changes
was the initiation of a demonstration project to test direct certification with Medicaid (see the text
box below). The law also funded performance incentive grants for high-performing states and
authorized corrective action plans for low-performing states in direct certification activities.79
Direct Certification with Medicaid Demonstration
The HHFKA initiated a demonstration project to conduct direct certification of children individually participating
in Medicaid and children in Medicaid households. Unlike the other programs used to directly certify children for
school meals, Medicaid does not convey categorical eligibility for free school meals, but rather identifies children in
households that would meet the income eligibility thresholds for either free or reduced-price school meals.80
Following the demonstration authority in the HHFKA as well as pilot authority in the Richard B. Russell National
School Lunch Act, some states are currently directly certifying children based on Medicaid data.81 As of school
year 2023-2024, there were 38 states operating direct certification with Medicaid. Two states used Medicaid to
directly certify children for free meals only (130% of the poverty level or below).82 Thirty-six states were
operating under an expanded direct certification demonstration project to test direct certification with Medicaid
for free and reduced-price meals (up to 185% of the poverty level).83
Verification of Eligibility
Each fall, districts are required to verify a sample of approved household applications on file,
with a focus on applications close to the eligibility threshold (“error-prone” applications).86
School districts may also conduct verification of questionable applications. Verification is not
required for children who are directly certified for free or reduced-price meals. (Note that districts
participating in Provisions 1, 2, and 3 must meet verification requirements for the years in which
they administer household applications.)
Many districts employ direct verification (matching data from other low-income programs) to
conduct their verification activities, but if data cannot be verified in this way, schools must
contact households to verify the information provided on the application. A child’s eligibility
status may stay the same or change (e.g., from free meals to reduced-price meals or loss of
eligibility) as a result of verification of household income, or if the household does not respond to
verification outreach (in which case eligibility would be lost, though that decision can be
appealed).
Reimbursement
School food authorities must keep track of the daily number of meals they serve in each category
(free, reduced-price, and paid) that meet federal nutrition requirements. School food authorities
then submit claims for reimbursement to the state agency, which submits the claims to FNS.
Approved reimbursements are distributed to school food authorities by the state agency, usually
on a monthly basis. Per statute, reimbursement rates are adjusted for inflation annually.87 Table 4
shows NSLP and SBP reimbursement rates for school year 2023-2024. (Note that school food
authorities also receive a per-lunch commodity reimbursement, discussed previously under
“Commodity Assistance”.)
The law provides a higher reimbursement rate for meals meeting certain criteria. For example,
school food authorities that are compliant with the updated federal nutrition standards for school
meals receive an additional 8 cents per lunch.
88 School food authorities also receive an additional
2 cents per lunch if they serve 60% or more of their lunches at a free or reduced price. For
breakfasts, school food authorities receive higher reimbursements if they serve 40% or more
lunches at a free or reduced price (referred to as severe need schools).
Once school food authorities receive the cash reimbursements, they can use the funds to support
almost any aspect of the school food service operation. However, federal cash reimbursements
must go into a nonprofit school food service account that is subject to federal regulations.89
Payments for non-program foods (e.g., vending machine sales) must also accrue to the nonprofit
school food service account.90
FNS periodically studies the costs of producing a reimbursable meal. In April 2019, FNS released
a School Nutrition and Meal Cost Study, which found that the average reported cost of producing
a reimbursable lunch was $3.81 in school year 2014-2015 (reported costs were defined as those
charged to the school food service account).91 This exceeded the average federal cash
reimbursement ($3.32) for lunches in school year 2014-2015. When unreported costs were
included (costs outside of the food service account; for example, labor costs associated with
processing applications), the cost of producing the average reimbursable lunch was $6.02. As
noted previously, children’s payments and state and local funds may also cover meal costs.