Can adversaries of the
 United States easily imitate its most advanced weapon systems and thus erode
 its military-technological superiority? Do reverse engineering, industrial espi-
 onage, and, in particular, cyber espionage facilitate and accelerate this process?
 China’s decades-long economic boom, military modernization program, mas-
 sive reliance on cyber espionage, and assertive foreign policy have made these
 questions increasingly salient. Yet, almost everything known about this topic
 draws from the past. As we explain in this article, the conclusions that the ex-
 isting literature has reached by studying prior eras have no applicability to the
 current day.
 Scholarship in international relations theory generally assumes that ris-
 ing states beneªt from the “advantage of backwardness,” as described by Alexander Gerschenkron.1 By free riding on the research and technology of
 the most advanced countries, less developed states can allegedly close the
 military-technological gap with their rivals relatively easily and quickly.2 More
 recent works maintain that globalization, the emergence of dual-use compo-
 nents, and advances in communications (including the opportunity for cyber
 espionage) have facilitated this process.3 This literature is built on shaky theo-
 retical foundations, and its claims lack empirical support.
 The international relations literature largely ignores one of the most impor-
 tant changes to have occurred in the realm of weapons development since the
 second industrial revolution (1870–1914): the exponential increase in the com-
 plexity of military technology. We argue that this increase in complexity
 has promoted a change in the system of production that has made the imita-
 tion and replication of the performance of state-of-the-art weapon systems
 harder—so much so as to offset the diffusing effects of globalization and ad-
 vances in communications. On the one hand, the increase in complexity has
 signiªcantly raised the entry barriers for the production of advanced wea-
 pon systems: countries must now possess an extremely advanced industrial,
 scientiªc, and technological base in weapons production before they can copy
 foreign military technology. On the other hand, the knowledge to design, de-
 velop, and produce advanced weapon systems is less likely to diffuse, given
 its increasingly tacit and organizational nature. As a result, the advantage of
 backwardness has shrunk signiªcantly, and know-how and experience in the
 production of advanced weapon systems have become an important source of
 power for those who master them. We employ two case studies to test this ar-
 gument: Imperial Germany’s rapid success in closing the technological gap
 with the British Dreadnought battleship, despite signiªcant inhibiting factors;
 and China’s struggle to imitate the U.S. F-22/A Raptor jet ªghter, despite sev-
 eral facilitating conditions.
 Our research contributes to key theoretical and policy debates. First, the ability to imitate state-of-the-art military hardware plays a central role in theo-
 ries that seek to explain patterns of internal balancing and the rise and fall of
 great powers. Yet, the mainstream international relations literature has not in-
 vestigated this process.4 Because imitating military technology was relatively
 easy in the past, scholars and policymakers assume that it also is today, as fre-
 quent analogies between Wilhelmine Germany and contemporary China epit-
 omize.5 In this article, we investigate the conditions under which the imitation
 of state-of-the-art weapon systems such as attack submarines and combat air-
 craft is more or less likely to succeed.
 Second, we develop the ªrst systematic theoretical explanation of why U.S.
 superiority in military technology remains largely unrivaled almost thirty
 years after the end of the Cold War, despite globalization and the information
 and communication technology revolution. Some scholars have argued that
 developing modern weapon systems has become dramatically more demand-
 ing, which in turn has made internal balancing against the United States more
 difªcult.6 This literature, however, cannot explain why in the age of globaliza-
 tion and instant communications—with cyber espionage permitting the theft
 of massive amount of digital data—U.S. know-how in advanced weapon sys-
 tems has not already diffused to other states. Other contributors to the debate
 on unipolarity have either pointed to the relative inferiority of Chinese mili-
 tary technology without providing a theoretical explanation, or they have ar-
 gued that developing the military capabilities to challenge the status quo is, in
 the long run, a function of political will—an argument that cannot account
 for the failure of the Soviet Union to cope with U.S. military technology from
 the late 1970s onward.7 We argue that in the transition from the second industrial revolution to the information age, the imitation of state-of-the-art mili-
 tary technology has become more difªcult, so much so that today rising
 powers or even peer competitors cannot easily copy foreign weapon systems.8
 Our ªndings address existing concerns that China’s use of cyber espionage
 and the increasing globalization of arms production will allow Beijing to rap-
 idly close the military-technological gap with the United States.9
 Third, the international relations literature accepts the claim that globali-
 zation and advances in communications have made the imitation of military
 technology easier; yet no one has empirically tested this proposition.10 This
 failing is particularly concerning in light of the opportunities opened by cyber
 espionage—a practice that, according to many observers, could erode the U.S.
 advantage in military technology. Richard Clark, a former U.S. senior govern-
 ment ofªcial, believes that Chinese cyber espionage could result in the United
 States “hav[ing] all of [its] research and development stolen”; Gen. Keith
 Alexander, a former director of the National Security Agency, worries that
 cyber espionage could lead to “the greatest transfer of wealth in history.”11
 With a few notable exceptions, however, international relations scholars have
 paid little attention to the advantages and limits of cyber espionage for copy-
 ing foreign military technology.12 Our research ªlls this gap and tests the con-
 ventional wisdom using the case of China, one of the states that has beneªted
 the most from globalization and that has employed cyber espionage more ex-
 tensively than any other country.