2022
Annual Report
To Our Shareholders,
We all know coming out of the pandemic has caused many companies to relook at their operations. 2022 was a
year of change for Herbalife as well as a year of challenge. With every challenge, there is great opportunity. I
came back to Herbalife because I believe passionately about what Herbalife does, and what it provides for health
and income.

Since returning to Herbalife, I along with our management team and distributor leaders from around the world
have embarked on a journey to expand our content, enhance the business opportunity, modernize our brand, and
expand our digital platform – with the aim to reach more customers and to provide our distributors a better plat-
form to operate their business. Our vision is to be the world’s premier health and wellness company and
community.

As I write this, more than 3,000 distributor leaders from around the world are traveling to Los Angeles to meet
together for the first time in three years to learn, to share, to innovate, and to build a path forward for Herbalife.
The time is now for us to reconnect, build on our strategic plan, and provide growth for all of our stakeholders.
Our digital transformation “Herbalife One” will enhance the Company’s two main platforms: content and busi-
ness opportunity.

Our content is our product. With obesity levels hitting record highs around the globe and a greater demand for
health and wellness support, we have plans to grow our product portfolio through our daily nutrition products
with expanded vegan and protein lines. We plan to explore other health and wellness opportunities that will be
based on global as well as regional consumer demands. For example, our unique Ayurvedic product line in India
has contributed to the success of our fastest growing market. We are unleashing similar innovative products
regionally in Europe, Asia and China, and we will continue to look for synergies and opportunities to globalize
our regional product offerings.

With enhancements to the business opportunity, our global distributor network will continue to give us a com-
petitive advantage to reach more consumers with more offerings than ever before. Our distributors give a
personal voice and passion to our products. Spanning across 95 markets, our distributors are amazing
entrepreneurs who have unique relationships with their customers, and through an expanded use of data, we will
be able to assist our distributors to sell more products and work more closely and efficiently with consumers on
their health and wellness journey.

To this end, we are modernizing our brand and compensation structure, including new promotions to energize
and incentivize our distributors to earn early in their Herbalife business opportunity journey. Together with
Herbalife One, our business opportunity will differentiate us and strengthen our leadership in the marketplace.

2023 is a start of a new chapter – one that is both motivating and exciting. In March, I marked my 20th year of
devoting my time, passion, and energy to Herbalife. I feel more optimistic about where we are headed today than
ever before. Our distributors and employees make Herbalife a community unlike any other. I know our distrib-
utors and employees are as incredibly excited about the future as I am.

Thank you for your trust and support.

Michael O. Johnson
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


This letter contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in any of our
forward-looking statements are reasonable, actual results or outcomes could differ materially from those pro-
jected or assumed in any of our forward-looking statements. Our future financial condition and results of oper-
ations, as well as any forward-looking statements, are subject to change and to inherent risks and uncertainties,
many of which are beyond our control. Additionally, many of these risks and uncertainties are, and may continue
to be, amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic. Important factors that could cause our actual results, performance
and achievements, or industry results to differ materially from estimates or projections contained in or implied
by our forward-looking statements include the following: the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and
current global economic conditions, including inflation, on us; our Members, customers, and supply chain; and
the world economy; our ability to attract and retain Members; our relationship with, and our ability to influence
the actions of, our Members; our noncompliance with, or improper action by our employees or Members in
violation of, applicable U.S. and foreign laws, rules, and regulations; adverse publicity associated with our
Company or the direct-selling industry, including our ability to comfort the marketplace and regulators regard-
ing our compliance with applicable laws; changing consumer preferences and demands and evolving industry
standards, including with respect to climate change, sustainability, and other environmental, social, and gover-
nance, or ESG, matters; the competitive nature of our business and industry; legal and regulatory matters,
including regulatory actions concerning, or legal challenges to, our products or network marketing program and
product liability claims; the Consent Order entered into with the FTC, the effects thereof and any failure to
comply therewith; risks associated with operating internationally and in China; our ability to execute our growth
and other strategic initiatives, including implementation of our Transformation Program and increased pene-
tration of our existing markets; any material disruption to our business caused by natural disasters, other cata-
strophic events, acts of war or terrorism, including the war in Ukraine, cybersecurity incidents, pandemics, and/
or other acts by third parties; our ability to adequately source ingredients, packaging materials, and other raw
materials and manufacture and distribute our products; our reliance on our information technology infra-
structure; noncompliance by us or our Members with any privacy laws, rules, or regulations or any security
breach involving the misappropriation, loss, or other unauthorized use or disclosure of confidential information;
contractual limitations on our ability to expand or change our direct-selling business model; the sufficiency of
our trademarks and other intellectual property; product concentration; our reliance upon, or the loss or
departure of any member of, our senior management team; restrictions imposed by covenants in the agreements
governing our indebtedness; risks related to our convertible notes; changes in, and uncertainties relating to, the
application of transfer pricing, income tax, customs duties, value added taxes, and other tax laws, treaties, and
regulations, or their interpretation; our incorporation under the laws of the Cayman Islands; and share price
volatility related to, among other things, speculative trading and certain traders shorting our common shares.
Forward-looking statements in this letter speak only as of March 14, 2023. We do not undertake any obligation
to update or release any revisions to any forward-looking statement or to report any events or circumstances
after such date or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as required by law.




                                                                                                            





                                                UNITED STATES
                                    SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
                                                                                 Washington, D.C. 20549

                                                                                      Form 10-K
(Mark One)
         ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
                                                                        For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022
                                                 OR
         TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
                                                                        For the transition period from                         to
                                                                               Commission file number: 1-32381


                                              HERBALIFE NUTRITION LTD.
                                                                     (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)

                                      Cayman Islands                                                                                            98-0377871
                                (State or other jurisdiction of                                                                              (I.R.S. Employer
                               incorporation or organization)                                                                               Identification No.)
                                                                                      P.O. Box 309GT
                                                                           Ugland House, South Church Street
                                                                             Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands
                                                                      (Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
                                                                                       (213) 745-0500
                                                                    (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
                                                                Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
                Title of each class:                                                    Trading Symbol(s):                                 Name of each exchange on which registered:
       Common Shares, par value $0.0005 per share                                             HLF                                                  New York Stock Exchange
                                                                Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
                                                                                                 None

         Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.        Yes ☒    No ☐
         Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.    Yes ☐    No ☒
          Indicate by check mark whether the registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months
(or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☒ No ☐
         Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this
chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes ☒ No ☐
         Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See
the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.

Large accelerated filer                           ☒                                                                                          Accelerated filer                                 ☐

Non-accelerated filer                             ☐                                                                                          Smaller reporting company                         ☐

Emerging growth company                           ☐
        If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting
standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
        Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting
under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
          If securities are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the financial statements of the registrant included in the filing reflect the correction of an
error to previously issued financial statements. ☐
        Indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation received by any of the registrant’s
executive officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b). ☐

         Indicate by check mark whether registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).         Yes ☐      No ☒
        There were 97,920,728 common shares outstanding as of February 7, 2023. The aggregate market value of the Registrant’s common shares held by non-affiliates was approximately
$896 million as of June 30, 2022, based upon the last reported sales price on the New York Stock Exchange on that date of $20.45. For the purposes of this disclosure only, the registrant has
assumed that its directors, executive officers, and the beneficial owners of 5% or more of the registrant’s outstanding common stock are the affiliates of the registrant.
                                                                      DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
      Portions of the registrant’s Definitive Proxy Statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission no later than 120 days after the end of the Registrant’s fiscal year ended
December 31, 2022, are incorporated by reference in Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.




                                                                                                    1
                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                                                               Page No.
                                                          PART I
Item 1.    Business                                                                                               5
Item 1A.   Risk Factors                                                                                          19
Item 1B.   Unresolved Staff Comments                                                                             43
Item 2.    Properties                                                                                            43
Item 3.    Legal Proceedings                                                                                     44
Item 4.    Mine Safety Disclosures                                                                               44


                                                          PART II
Item 5.    Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity     45
           Securities
Item 6.    [Reserved]                                                                                            46
Item 7.    Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations                 47
Item 7A.   Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk                                            67
Item 8.    Financial Statements and Supplementary Data                                                           69
Item 9.    Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure                  70
Item 9A.   Controls and Procedures                                                                               70
Item 9B.   Other Information                                                                                     70
Item 9C.   Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections                                   70


                                                          PART III
Item 10.   Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance                                                71
Item 11.   Executive Compensation                                                                                71
Item 12.   Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters        71
Item 13.   Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence                             71
Item 14.   Principal Accounting Fees and Services                                                                71


                                                          PART IV
Item 15.   Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules                                                                72
Item 16.   Form 10-K Summary                                                                                     125




                                                             2
                                              FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
      This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities
Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All statements other than statements of
historical fact are “forward-looking statements” for purposes of federal and state securities laws, including any projections of earnings,
revenue or other financial items; any statements of the plans, strategies and objectives of management, including for future operations,
capital expenditures, or share repurchases; any statements concerning proposed new products, services, or developments; any
statements regarding future economic conditions or performance; any statements of belief or expectation; and any statements of
assumptions underlying any of the foregoing or other future events. Forward-looking statements may include, among other, the words
“may,” “will,” “estimate,” “intend,” “continue,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate” or any other similar words.

      Although we believe that the expectations reflected in any of our forward-looking statements are reasonable, actual results or
outcomes could differ materially from those projected or assumed in any of our forward-looking statements. Our future financial
condition and results of operations, as well as any forward-looking statements, are subject to change and to inherent risks and
uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control. Additionally, many of these risks and uncertainties are, and may continue to be,
amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic. Important factors that could cause our actual results, performance and achievements, or industry
results to differ materially from estimates or projections contained in or implied by our forward-looking statements include the
following:
      •     the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and current global economic conditions, including inflation, on us; our
            Members, customers, and supply chain; and the world economy;
      •     our ability to attract and retain Members;
      •     our relationship with, and our ability to influence the actions of, our Members;
      •     our noncompliance with, or improper action by our employees or Members in violation of, applicable U.S. and foreign laws,
            rules, and regulations;
      •     adverse publicity associated with our Company or the direct-selling industry, including our ability to comfort the
            marketplace and regulators regarding our compliance with applicable laws;
      •     changing consumer preferences and demands and evolving industry standards, including with respect to climate change,
            sustainability, and other environmental, social, and governance, or ESG, matters;
      •     the competitive nature of our business and industry;
      •     legal and regulatory matters, including regulatory actions concerning, or legal challenges to, our products or network
            marketing program and product liability claims;
      •     the Consent Order entered into with the FTC, the effects thereof and any failure to comply therewith;
      •     risks associated with operating internationally and in China;
      •     our ability to execute our growth and other strategic initiatives, including implementation of our Transformation Program
            and increased penetration of our existing markets;
      •     any material disruption to our business caused by natural disasters, other catastrophic events, acts of war or terrorism,
            including the war in Ukraine, cybersecurity incidents, pandemics, and/or other acts by third parties;
      •     our ability to adequately source ingredients, packaging materials, and other raw materials and manufacture and distribute
            our products;
      •     our reliance on our information technology infrastructure;
      •     noncompliance by us or our Members with any privacy laws, rules, or regulations or any security breach involving the
            misappropriation, loss, or other unauthorized use or disclosure of confidential information;
      •     contractual limitations on our ability to expand or change our direct-selling business model;
      •     the sufficiency of our trademarks and other intellectual property;
      •     product concentration;
      •     our reliance upon, or the loss or departure of any member of, our senior management team;
      •     restrictions imposed by covenants in the agreements governing our indebtedness;


                                                                    3
      •     risks related to our convertible notes;
      •     changes in, and uncertainties relating to, the application of transfer pricing, income tax, customs duties, value added taxes,
            and other tax laws, treaties, and regulations, or their interpretation;
      •     our incorporation under the laws of the Cayman Islands; and
      •     share price volatility related to, among other things, speculative trading and certain traders shorting our common shares.

      Additional factors and uncertainties that could cause actual results or outcomes to differ materially from our forward-looking
statements are set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, and Part II, Item 7,
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, and in our Consolidated Financial Statements
and the related Notes. In addition, historical, current, and forward-looking sustainability-related statements may be based on standards
for measuring progress that are still developing, internal controls and processes that continue to evolve, and assumptions that are
subject to change in the future.

      Forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K speak only as of the date hereof. We do not undertake any
obligation to update or release any revisions to any forward-looking statement or to report any events or circumstances after the date
hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as required by law.

                                                            The Company
      “We,” “our,” “us,” “Company,” “Herbalife,” and “Herbalife Nutrition” refer to Herbalife Nutrition Ltd., a Cayman Islands
exempted company incorporated with limited liability, and its subsidiaries. Herbalife Nutrition Ltd. is a holding company, with
substantially all of its assets consisting of the capital stock of its direct and indirectly-owned subsidiaries.




                                                                    4
                                                                     PART I
Item 1.   Business
GENERAL
      Herbalife Nutrition is a global nutrition company that provides health and wellness products to consumers in 95 markets, which
consists of countries and territories, through our direct-selling business model. Our products are primarily in the categories of weight
management, sports nutrition, and targeted nutrition.

       We use a direct-selling business model to distribute and market our nutrition products to and through a global network of
independent members, or Members. Members include consumers who purchase products for their own personal use and distributors
who wish to resell products or build a sales organization. We believe that direct selling is ideally suited for our business because the
distribution and sales of our products with personalized support, coaching, and education provide a supportive and understanding
community of like-minded people who prioritize health and nutrition.

      In addition to the effectiveness of personalized selling through a direct-selling business model, we believe the primary drivers for
our success throughout our 43-year operating history have been enhanced consumer awareness and demand for our products due to
global trends such as the obesity epidemic, increasing interest in a fit and active lifestyle, living healthier, and the rise of
entrepreneurship.

PRODUCT SALES
       Our science-backed products help Members and their customers improve their overall health, enhance their wellness, and achieve
their fitness and sport goals. As of December 31, 2022, we marketed and sold approximately 131 product types. Our products are often
sold as part of a program and therefore our portfolio is comprised of a series of related products designed to simplify weight management,
health and wellness, and overall nutrition for our Members and their customers. Our Formula 1 Nutritional Shake Mix, our best-selling
product line, approximated 26% of our net sales for the year ended December 31, 2022.

      The following table summarizes our products by product category:

                                           Percentage of Net Sales
                                   2022            2021                2020             Description             Representative Products
Weight Management                 56.8%           58.1%               59.8%    Meal replacement, protein     Formula 1 Healthy Meal,
                                                                               shakes, drink mixes, weight   Herbal Tea Concentrate,
                                                                               loss enhancers and healthy    Protein Drink Mix,
                                                                               snacks                        Personalized Protein
                                                                                                             Powder, Total Control®,
                                                                                                             Formula 2 Multivitamin
                                                                                                             Complex, Prolessa™ Duo,
                                                                                                             and Protein Bars
Targeted Nutrition                29.1%           28.2%               27.6%    Functional beverages and      Herbal Aloe Concentrate,
                                                                               dietary and nutritional       Active Fiber Complex,
                                                                               supplements containing        Niteworks®, and
                                                                               quality herbs, vitamins,      Herbalifeline®
                                                                               minerals and other natural
                                                                               ingredients
Energy, Sports, and               10.6%            9.5%               7.9%     Products that support a      Herbalife24® product line,
Fitness                                                                        healthy active lifestyle     N-R-G Tea, and Liftoff®
                                                                                                            energy drink
Outer Nutrition                   1.6%             1.9%               2.0%     Facial skin care, body care, Herbalife SKIN line and
                                                                               and hair care                Herbal Aloe Bath and Body
                                                                                                            Care line
Literature, Promotional,          1.9%             2.3%               2.7%     Start-up kits, sales tools,  Herbalife Member Packs
and Other                                                                      and educational materials    and BizWorks




                                                                       5
   Product returns and buyback policies
      We offer a customer satisfaction guarantee in substantially all markets where our products are sold. If for any reason a customer
or preferred member is not satisfied with an Herbalife Nutrition product, they may return it or any unused portion of the product within
30 days from the time of receipt for a full refund or credit toward the exchange of another Herbalife Nutrition product.

      In addition, in substantially all markets, we maintain a buyback program pursuant to which we will purchase back unsold products
from a Member who decides to leave the business. Subject to certain terms and conditions that may vary by market, the buyback program
generally permits a Member to return unopened products or sales materials in marketable condition purchased within the prior twelve-
month period in exchange for a refund of the net price paid for the product and, in most markets, the cost of returning the products and
materials to us.

      Together, product returns and buybacks were approximately 0.1% of net sales for each of the years ended December 31, 2022,
2021, and 2020.

   Product development
       Our products are focused on nutrition and seek to help consumers achieve their goals in the areas of weight management; targeted
nutrition (including everyday wellness and healthy aging); energy, sports, and fitness; and outer nutrition. We believe our focus on
nutrition and botanical science and the combination of our internal efforts with the scientific expertise of outside resources, including
our ingredient suppliers, major universities, and our Nutrition Advisory Board, have resulted in product differentiation that has given
our Members and consumers increased confidence in our products.

      We continue to invest in scientific and technical functions, including research and development associated with creating new or
enhancing current product formulations and the advancement of personalized nutrition solutions; clinical studies of existing products or
products in development; technical operations to improve current product formulations; quality assurance and quality control to establish
the appropriate quality systems, controls, and standards; and rigorous ingredient and product testing to ensure compliance with
regulatory requirements, as well as in the areas of regulatory and scientific affairs. Our personalized nutrition solutions include tools
which aid in the development of optimal product packages specific to our customers’ individual nutritional needs, based on their
expected wellness goals.

      Our product development strategy is twofold: (1) to increase the value of existing customers by investing in products that address
customers’ health, wellness and nutrition considerations, fill perceived gaps in our portfolios, add flavors, increase convenience by
developing products like snacks and bars, and expand afternoon and evening consumption with products like savory shakes or soups;
and (2) to attract new customers by entering into new categories, offering more choices, increasing individualization, and expanding our
current sports line. We have a keen focus on product innovation and aim to launch new products and variations on existing products on
a regular basis. Once a particular market opportunity has been identified, our scientists, along with our operations, marketing, and sales
teams, work closely with Member leadership to introduce new products and variations on existing products.

       Our Nutrition Advisory Board and Dieticians Advisory Board are comprised of leading experts around the world in the fields of
nutrition and health who educate our Members on the principles of nutrition, physical activity, diet, and healthy lifestyle. We rely on
the scientific contributions from members of our Nutrition Advisory Board and our in-house scientific team to continually upgrade
existing products or introduce new products as new scientific studies become available and are accepted by regulatory authorities around
the world.

COMPETITION
       The nutrition industry is highly competitive. Nutrition products are sold through a number of distribution channels, including
direct selling, online retailers, specialty retailers, and the discounted channels of food, drug and mass merchandise. Our competitors
include companies such as Conagra Brands, Hain Celestial, and Post. Additionally, we compete for the recruitment of Members from
other network marketing organizations, including those that market nutrition products and other entrepreneurial opportunities. Our
direct-selling competitors include companies such as Nu Skin, Tupperware, and USANA. Our ability to remain competitive depends on
many factors, including having relevant products that meet consumer needs, a rewarding compensation plan, enhanced education and
tools, innovation in our products and services, competitive pricing, a strong reputation, and a financially viable company.

      We have differentiated ourselves from our competitors through our Members’ focus on the consultative sales process, which
includes ongoing personal contact, coaching, behavior motivation, education, and the creation of supportive communities. For example,
many Members have frequent contact with and provide support to their customers through a community-based approach to help them
achieve nutrition goals. Some methods include Nutrition Clubs, Weight Loss Challenges, Wellness Evaluations, and Fit Camps.

                                                                    6
      For additional information regarding competition, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

OUR NETWORK MARKETING PROGRAM
   General
      Our products are sold and distributed through a global direct selling business model which individuals may join to become a
Member of our network marketing program. We believe that the one-on-one personalized service inherent in the direct-selling business
model is ideally suited to marketing and selling our nutrition products. Sales of nutrition products are reinforced by the ongoing personal
contact, coaching, behavior motivation, education, and the creation of supportive communities. This frequent, personal contact can
enhance consumers’ nutritional and health education as well as motivate healthy behavioral changes in consumers to begin and maintain
an active lifestyle through wellness and weight management programs. In addition, our Members consume our products themselves,
and, therefore, can provide first-hand testimonials of the use and effectiveness of our products and programs to their customers. The
personalized experience of our Members has served as a very powerful sales tool for our products.
       People become Herbalife Nutrition Members for a number of reasons. Many first start out as consumers of our products who want
to lose weight or improve their nutrition, and are customers of our Members. Some later join Herbalife Nutrition and become Members
themselves, which makes them eligible to purchase products directly from us, simply to receive a discounted price on products for them
and their families. Some Members are interested in the entrepreneurial opportunity to earn compensation based on their own skills and
hard work and join Herbalife Nutrition to earn part-time or full-time income. Our objective is sustainable growth in the sales of our
products to our Members and their customers by increasing the productivity, retention and recruitment of our Member base through the
structure of our network marketing program.

   Segmentation
      In many of our markets, including certain of our largest markets such as the United States, Mexico, and India, we have segmented
our Member base into two categories: “preferred members” – who are consumers who wish to purchase product for their own household
use, and “distributors” – who are Members who also wish to resell products or build a sales organization. This Member segmentation
provides a clear differentiation between those interested in retailing our products or building a sales organization, and those simply
consuming our products as discount customers. This distinction allows us to more effectively communicate and market to each group,
and provides us with better information regarding our Members within the context of their stated intent and goals. As of December 31,
2022, we had approximately 6.2 million Members, including 2.9 million preferred members and 2.0 million distributors in the markets
where we have established these two categories and 0.3 million sales representatives and independent service providers in China.

       The number of preferred members and distributors may change as a result of segmentation and/or conversion, and do not
necessarily represent a change in the total number of Members. Any future change in the number of preferred members or distributors
is not necessarily indicative of our future expected financial performance.

   Our Members
      We believe our Members are the most important differentiator as we go to market with our nutrition products, because of the one-
on-one direct contact they have with their customers, along with the education, training and community support services that we believe
help improve the nutrition habits of consumers.

      We work closely with our entrepreneurial Members to improve the sustainability of their businesses and to reach consumers. We
require our Members to fairly and honestly market both our products and the Herbalife Nutrition business opportunity. Our relationship
with our Members is key to our continued success as they allow us direct access to the voice of consumers.

      Many of our entrepreneurial Members identify and test new marketing efforts and programs developed by other Members and
disseminate successful techniques to their sales organizations. For example, Members in Mexico developed businesses that became
known as “Nutrition Clubs,” marketing techniques that improve the productivity and efficiency of our Members as well as the
affordability of our weight loss products for their customers. Rather than buying several retail products, these businesses allow
consumers to purchase and consume our products each day (a Member marketing technique we refer to as “daily consumption”), while
continuing to benefit from the support and interaction with the Member as well as socializing with other customers in a designated
location. Other programs to drive daily consumption, whether for weight management or for improved physical fitness, include Member-
conducted weight loss contests, or Weight Loss Challenges, Member-led fitness programs, or Fit Camps, and Member-led Wellness
Evaluations. We refer to successful Member marketing techniques that we disseminate throughout our Member network, such as
Nutrition Clubs, Weight Loss Challenges, and Fit Camps, as Daily Methods of Operations, or DMOs.



                                                                    7
      We believe that personal and professional development is key to our Members’ success and, therefore, we and our sales leader
Members – those that achieve certain levels within our Marketing Plan – have meetings and events to support this important objective.
We and our Member leadership, which is comprised of sales leaders, conduct in-person and virtual training sessions on local, regional,
and global levels attended by thousands of Members to provide updates on product education, sales and marketing training, and
instruction on available tools. These events are opportunities to showcase and disseminate our Members’ evolving best marketing
practices and DMOs from around the world and to introduce new or upgraded products. A variety of training and development tools are
also available through online and mobile platforms.

       On July 18, 2002, we entered into an agreement with our Members that provides that we will continue to distribute Herbalife
Nutrition products exclusively to and through our Members and that, other than changes required by applicable law or necessary in our
reasonable business judgment to account for specific local market or currency conditions to achieve a reasonable profit on operations,
we will not make any material changes to certain aspects of our Marketing Plan that are adverse to our Members without the support of
our Member leadership. Specifically, any such changes would require the approval of at least 51% of our Members then at the level of
President’s Team earning at the production bonus level of 6% who vote, provided that at least 50% of those Members entitled to vote
do in fact vote. We initiate these types of changes based on the assessment of what will be best for us and our Members and then submit
such changes for the requisite vote. We believe that this agreement has strengthened our relationship with our existing Members,
improved our ability to recruit new Members and generally increased the long-term stability of our business.

   Member Compensation and Sales Leader Retention and Requalification
      In addition to benefiting from discounted prices, Members interested in the entrepreneurial opportunity may earn profit from
several sources. First, Members may earn profits by purchasing our products at wholesale prices, discounted depending on the Member’s
level within our Marketing Plan, and reselling those products at prices they establish for themselves to generate retail profit. Second,
Members who sponsor other Members and establish, maintain, coach, and train their own sales organizations may earn additional income
based on the sales of their organization, which may include royalty overrides, production bonuses, and other cash bonuses. Members
earning such compensation have generally attained the level of sales leader as described below. There are also many Members, which
include distributors, who have not sponsored another Member. Members who have not sponsored another Member are generally
considered discount buyers or small retailers. While a number of these Members have also attained the level of sales leader, they do not
receive additional income as do Members who have sponsored other Members.

      We assign point values, known as Volume Points, to each of our products to determine a Member’s level within the Marketing
Plan. See Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Operating Results, of this Annual Report
on Form 10-K for a further description of Volume Points. Typically, a Member accumulates Volume Points for a given sale at the time
the Member pays for the product. However, since May 2017, a Member does not receive Volume Points for a transaction in the United
States until that product is sold to a customer at a profit and it is documented in compliance with the consent order, or Consent Order,
we entered into with the Federal Trade Commission, or the FTC, in 2016. The Member’s level within the Marketing Plan is used to
determine the discount applied to their purchase of our products and whether they have qualified to become a sales leader. To become
a sales leader, or qualify for a higher level within our Marketing Plan, Members must achieve specified Volume Point thresholds of
product sales or earn certain amounts of royalty overrides during specified time periods and generally must re-qualify once each year.
Qualification criteria vary somewhat by market. We have initial qualification methods of up to 12 months to encourage a more gradual
qualification. We believe a gradual qualification approach is important to the success and retention of new sales leaders and benefits the
business in the long term as it allows new Members to obtain product and customer experience as well as additional training and
education on Herbalife Nutrition products, daily consumption based DMOs, and the business opportunity prior to becoming a sales
leader.

       The basis for calculating Marketing Plan payouts varies depending on product and market: for 2022, we utilized on a weighted-
average basis approximately 90% of suggested retail price, to which we applied discounts of up to 50% for distributor allowances and
payout rates of up to 15% for royalty overrides, up to 7% for production bonuses, and approximately 1% for a cash bonus known as the
Mark Hughes bonus. We believe that the opportunity for Members to earn royalty overrides and production bonuses contributes
significantly to our ability to retain our most active and productive Members.

      Our Marketing Plan generally requires each sales leader to re-qualify for such status each year, prior to February, in order to
maintain their 50% discount on products and be eligible to receive additional income. In February of each year, we demote from the
rank of sales leader those Members who did not satisfy the re-qualification requirements during the preceding twelve months. The re-
qualification requirement does not apply to new sales leaders (i.e. those who became sales leaders subsequent to the January re-
qualification of the prior year).




                                                                    8
      As of December 31, 2022, prior to our February re-qualification process, approximately 772,000 of our Members have attained
the level of sales leader, of which approximately 734,000 have attained this level in the 94 markets where we use our Marketing Plan
and 38,000 independent service providers operating in our China business. See Business in China below for a description of our business
in China.

      The table below reflects sales leader retention rates by year and by region:

                                                                                            Sales Leader Retention Rate
                                                                                   2023                2022             2021
              North America                                                            69.7%               58.8%           70.8%
              Latin America (1)                                                        71.6%               69.3%           67.0%
              EMEA                                                                     64.6%               77.1%           72.7%
              Asia Pacific                                                             66.6%               66.5%           63.5%
              Total sales leaders                                                      67.6%               68.9%           67.9%
(1) The Company combined the Mexico and South and Central America regions into the Latin America region in 2022. Historical
      information has been reclassified to conform with the current period geographic presentation.

       For the latest twelve-month re-qualification period ending January 2023, approximately 67.6% of our sales leaders, excluding
China, re-qualified, versus 68.9% for the twelve-month period ended January 2022. The Company throughout its history has adjusted
the re-qualification criteria from time to time in response to evolving business objectives and market conditions, and the above results
include the effects of all such changes. For example, in recent years certain markets have allowed members to utilize a lower re-
qualification volume threshold and the Company has continued to expand this lower re-qualification method to additional markets.
Separately, with revised business requirements in place following the Consent Order, as described in Network Marketing Program
below, we utilize a re-qualification equalization factor for U.S. Members to better align their re-qualification thresholds with Members
in other markets, and retention results for each of the years presented include the effect of the equalization factor. We believe this factor
preserves retention rate comparability across markets. Also, for each of the years presented, the retention results exclude certain markets
for which, due to local operating conditions, sales leaders were not required to requalify.

      We believe sales leader retention rates are the result of efforts we have made to try and improve the sustainability of sales leaders’
businesses, such as encouraging Members to obtain experience retailing Herbalife Nutrition products before becoming a sales leader
and providing them with advanced technology tools, as well as reflecting market conditions. As our business operations evolve,
including the segmentation of our Member base in certain markets and changes in sales leader re-qualification thresholds for other
markets, management continues to evaluate the importance of sales leader retention rate information.

      The table below reflects the number of sales leaders as of the end of February of the year indicated (subsequent to the annual re-
qualification process) and by region:

                                                                                              Number of Sales Leaders
                                                                                     2022             2021              2020
              North America                                                           80,278             95,402          71,202
              Latin America (1)                                                      125,726            131,359         134,401
              EMEA                                                                   183,056            158,153         130,438
              Asia Pacific                                                           201,137            173,582         158,815
              Total sales leaders                                                    590,197            558,496         494,856
              China                                                                   33,486             68,301          70,701
              Worldwide total sales leaders                                          623,683            626,797         565,557

(1) The Company combined the Mexico and South and Central America regions into the Latin America region in 2022. Historical
      information has been reclassified to conform with the current period geographic presentation.

      The number of sales leaders as of December 31 will exceed the number immediately subsequent to the preceding re-qualification
period because sales leaders qualify throughout the year but sales leaders who do not re-qualify are removed from the rank of sales
leader the following February.




                                                                     9
   Business in China
       Our business model in China includes unique features as compared to our traditional business model in order to ensure compliance
with Chinese regulations. As a result, our business model in China differs from that used in other markets. Members in China are
categorized differently than those in other markets. In China, we sell our products to and through independent service providers and
sales representatives to customers and preferred customers, as well as through Company-operated retail platforms when necessary.

       In China, while multi-level marketing is not permitted, direct selling is permitted. Chinese citizens who apply and become
Members are referred to as sales representatives. These sales representatives are permitted to sell away from fixed retail locations in the
provinces where we have direct selling licenses, including in the provinces of Jiangsu, Guangdong, Shandong, Zhejiang, Guizhou,
Beijing, Fujian, Sichuan, Hubei, Shanxi, Shanghai, Jiangxi, Liaoning, Jilin, Henan, Chongqing, Hebei, Shaanxi, Tianjin, Heilongjiang,
Hunan, Guangxi, Hainan, Anhui, Yunnan, Gansu, Ningxia, and Inner Mongolia. In Xinjiang province, where we do not have a direct
selling license, we have a Company-operated retail store that can directly serve customers and preferred customers. With online
orderings throughout China, there has been a declining demand in Company-operated retail stores.

      Sales representatives receive scaled rebates based on the volume of products they purchase. Sales representatives who reach
certain volume thresholds and meet certain performance criteria are eligible to apply to provide marketing, sales and support services.
Once their application is accepted, they are referred to as independent service providers. Independent service providers are independent
business entities that are eligible to receive compensation from Herbalife Nutrition for the marketing, sales and support services they
provide so long as they satisfy certain conditions, including procuring the requisite business licenses, having a physical business location,
and complying with all applicable Chinese laws and Herbalife Nutrition rules.

      In China, our independent service providers are compensated for marketing, sales support, and other services, instead of the
Member allowances and royalty overrides utilized in our global Marketing Plan. The service hours and related fees eligible to be earned
by the independent service providers are based on a number of factors, including the sales generated through them and through others
to whom they may provide marketing, sales support and other services, the quality of their service, and other factors. Total compensation
available to our independent service providers in China can generally be comparable to the total compensation available to other sales
leaders globally. The Company does this by performing an analysis in our worldwide system to estimate the potential compensation
available to the service providers, which can generally be comparable to that of sales leaders in other countries. After adjusting such
amounts for other factors and dividing by each service provider’s hourly rate, we then notify each independent service provider the
maximum hours of work for which they are eligible to be compensated in the given month. In order for a service provider to be paid,
the Company requires each service provider to invoice the Company for their services.

RESOURCES
       We seek to provide the highest quality products to our Members and their customers through our “seed to feed” strategy, which
includes significant investments in obtaining quality ingredients from traceable sources, qualified by scientific personnel through product
testing, and increasing the amount of self-manufacturing of our top products.

   Ingredients
       Our seed to feed strategy is rooted in using quality ingredients from traceable sources. Our procurement process for many of our
botanical products now stretches back to the farms and includes self-processing of teas and herbal ingredients into finished raw materials
at our own facilities. Our Changsha, China facility exclusively provides high quality tea and herbal raw materials to our manufacturing
facilities as well as our third-party contract manufacturers around the world. We also source ingredients that we do not self-process from
companies that are well-established, reputable suppliers in their respective field. These suppliers typically utilize similar quality
processes, equipment, expertise, and having traceability as we do with our own modern quality processes. As part of our program to
ensure the procurement of high-quality ingredients, we also test our incoming raw materials for compliance to potency, identity, and
adherence to strict specifications.




                                                                     10
   Manufacturing
      The next key component of our seed to feed strategy involves the high-quality manufacturing of these ingredients into finished
products, which are produced at both third-party manufacturers and our own manufacturing facilities. As part of our long-term strategy,
we seek to expand and increase our self-manufacturing capabilities. Our manufacturing facilities, known as Herbalife Innovation and
Manufacturing Facilities, or HIMs, include HIM Lake Forest, HIM Winston-Salem, HIM Suzhou, and HIM Nanjing. HIM Winston-
Salem is currently our largest manufacturing facility at approximately 800,000 square feet. Together, our HIM manufacturing facilities
produce approximately 51% of our inner nutrition products sold worldwide. Self-manufacturing also enables us greater control to reduce
negative environmental impacts of our operations and supply chain. As described in the Sustainability section below, we are focused on
developing science-based green-house gas emission reduction targets for our manufacturing facilities as part of our sustainability goals.
We are also focused on reducing single-use plastics throughout our global distribution network and incorporating more sustainable
content, such as post-consumer recycled resin, into our packaging.

       Our finished products are analyzed for label claims and tested for microbiological purity, thereby verifying that our products
comply with food safety standards, meet label claims and have met other quality standards. For self-manufactured products, we conduct
all of our testing in-house at our fully-equipped, modern quality control laboratories in the U.S. and China. We have two quality control
laboratories in Southern California and Changsha, China (including a Center of Excellence in both locations). In addition, we also have
a Center of Excellence laboratory in Bangalore, India, and a quality control laboratory in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, Suzhou,
China, and Nanjing, China. All HIM quality control labs contain modern analytical equipment and are backed by the expertise in testing
and methods development of our scientists. In our U.S. HIM facilities, which manufacture products for the U.S. and most of our
international markets, we operate and adhere to the regulations established by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, and
strict Current Good Manufacturing Practice regulations, or CGMPs, for food, acidified foods, and dietary supplements.

       We also work closely with our third-party manufacturers to ensure high quality products are produced and tested through a
vigorous quality control process at approved contract manufacturer labs or third-party labs. For these products manufactured at other
facilities, we combine four elements to ensure quality products: (1) the same selectivity and assurance in ingredients as noted above;
(2) use of reputable, CGMP-compliant, quality- and sustainability-minded manufacturing partners; (3) supplier qualification through
annual audit programs; and (4) significant product quality testing. During 2022, we purchased approximately 15% of our products from
our top three third-party manufacturers.

   Infrastructure and Technology
       Our direct-selling business model enables us to grow our business with moderate investment in infrastructure and fixed costs. We
incur no direct incremental cost to add a new Member in our existing markets, and our Member compensation varies directly with
product sales. In addition, our Members also bear a portion of our consumer marketing expenses, and our sales leaders sponsor and
coordinate Member recruiting and most meeting and training initiatives. Additionally, our infrastructure features scalable production
and distribution of our products as a result of having our own manufacturing facilities and numerous third-party manufacturing
relationships, as well as our global footprint of in-house and third-party distribution centers.

       An important part of our seed to feed strategy is having an efficient infrastructure to deliver products to our Members and their
customers. As the shift in consumption patterns continues to reflect an increasing daily consumption focus, one focus of this strategy is
to provide more product access points closer to our Members and their customers. We have both Company-operated and outsourced
distribution points ranging from our “hub” distribution centers in Los Angeles, Memphis, and Venray, Netherlands, to mid-size
distribution centers in major countries, to small pickup locations spread throughout the world. We also expect to continue to improve
our distribution channels relating to home delivery as we expect to see continued increased demands for our products being shipped to
our Members in certain of our larger markets. In addition to these distribution points, we partner with certain retail locations to provide
Member pickup points in areas which are not well serviced by our distribution points. We have also identified a number of methods and
approaches that better support Members by providing access points closer to where they do business and by improving product delivery
efficiency through our distribution channels. Specific methods vary by markets and consider local Member needs and available
resources. In aggregate, we have over 1,500 distribution points and partner retail locations around the world. In addition to our
distribution points, we contract third party-run drop-off locations where we can ship to and Members can pick up ordered products.




                                                                    11
       We leverage our technology infrastructure in order to maintain, protect, and enhance existing systems and develop new systems
to keep pace with continuing changes in technology, evolving industry and regulatory standards, emerging data security risks, and
changing user patterns and preferences. We also continue to invest in our manufacturing and operational infrastructure to accelerate new
products to market and accommodate planned business growth. We invest in business intelligence tools to enable better analysis of our
business and to identify opportunities for growth. We will continue to build on these platforms to take advantage of the rapid
development of technology around the globe to support a more robust Member and customer experience. In addition, we leverage an
Oracle business suite platform to support our business operations, improve productivity and support our strategic initiatives. Our
investment in technology infrastructure helps support our capacity to grow. In 2021, we also initiated a global transformation program
to optimize global processes for future growth, or the Transformation Program. The Transformation Program involves the investment
in certain new technologies and the realignment of infrastructure and the locations of certain functions to better support distributors and
customers. The Transformation Program is still ongoing and expected to be completed in 2024 as described further in Part II, Item 7,
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Operating Results, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Note
14, Transformation Program, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement
Schedules, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

       In addition, many Members rely on the use of technology to support their goals and businesses. As part of our continued investment
in technology to further support our Members and drive long-term growth, we have enhanced our product access and distribution
network to support higher volumes of online or mobile orders, allowing Members and their customers to select home or business delivery
options. We have also implemented information technology systems to support Members and their increasing demand to be more
connected to Herbalife Nutrition, their business, and their consumers with tools such as HN MyClub, Engage, HNconnect, BizWorks,
MyHerbalife, GoHerbalife, and Herbalife.com. Additionally, we continue to support a growing suite of point-of-sale tools to assist our
Members with ordering, tracking, and customer relationship management. These tools allow our Members to manage their business and
communicate with their customers more efficiently and effectively. During 2022, we also commenced a Digital Technology Program to
develop a new enhanced platform to provide enhanced digital capabilities and experiences to our Members. This is a multi-year program
and we expect our capital expenditures to increase in 2023 and future years as result of our investments in this Digital Technology
Program as described further in Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Operating Results,
of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

   Intellectual Property and Branding
       Marketing foods and supplement products on the basis of sound science means using ingredients in the composition and quantity
as demonstrated to be effective in the relevant scientific literature. Use of these ingredients for their well-established purposes is by
definition not novel, and for that reason, most food uses of these ingredients are not subject to patent protection. Notwithstanding the
absence of patent protection, we do own proprietary formulations for substantially all of our weight management products and dietary
and nutritional supplements. We take care in protecting the intellectual property rights of our proprietary formulas by restricting access
to our formulas within the Company to those persons or departments that require access to them to perform their functions, and by
requiring our finished goods suppliers and consultants to execute supply and non-disclosure agreements that contractually protect our
intellectual property rights. Disclosure of these formulas, in redacted form, is also necessary to obtain product registrations in many
countries. We also make efforts to protect certain unique formulations under patent law. We strive to protect all new product
developments as the confidential trade secrets of the Company.

       We use the umbrella trademarks Herbalife®, Herbalife Nutrition®, and the Tri-Leaf design worldwide, and protect several other
trademarks and trade names related to our products and operations, such as Niteworks® and Liftoff®. Our trademark registrations are
issued through the United States Patent and Trademark Office, or USPTO, and comparable agencies in the foreign countries. We believe
our trademarks and trade names contribute to our brand awareness.

       To increase our brand awareness, we and our Members use a variety of tools and marketing channels. These can include anything
from traditional media to social media and alliances with partners who can promote our goal of better living through nutrition. Herbalife
Nutrition sponsorships of and partnerships with featured athletes, teams, and events promote brand awareness and the use of Herbalife
Nutrition products. We continue to build brand awareness with a goal towards becoming the most trusted brand in nutrition. We also
work to leverage the power of our Member base as a marketing and brand-building tool. We maintain a brand style guide and brand
asset library so that our Members have access to the Herbalife Nutrition brand logo and marketing materials for use in their marketing
efforts.




                                                                    12
   Sustainability
       Our goals and objectives to nourish people and communities and to improve the planet are part of both our day-to-day activities
and our long-term growth strategy. As a signatory of the United Nations Global Compact, or UNGC, we have aligned our sustainability
initiatives outlined by the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals. Our current sustainability initiatives focus on issues
including climate and emissions, packaging, and operational waste. For example, we have implemented projects that have reduced
overall packaging materials and incorporated usage of recycled materials in the packaging of our flagship product, Formula 1 Healthy
Meal Nutritional Shake in North America, Mexico, and in certain markets where permitted by regulations. We are seeking opportunities
across operations to reduce waste-prone materials such as single-use plastics. More information on these efforts is provided in the
Manufacturing section above. For information relating to our culture, diversity, equity, and inclusion, please see the Human Capital
section below.

REGULATION
   General
       In our United States and foreign markets, we are affected by extensive laws, governmental regulations, administrative
determinations and guidance, court decisions and similar constraints that regulate the conduct of our business. Such laws, regulations
and other constraints exist at the federal, state or local levels in the United States and at all levels of government in foreign jurisdictions,
and include regulations pertaining to: (1) the formulation, manufacturing, packaging, labeling, distribution, importation, sale, and storage
of our products; (2) product claims and advertising, including direct claims and advertising by us, as well as claims and advertising by
Members, for which we may be held responsible; (3) our network marketing program; (4) transfer pricing and similar regulations that
affect the level of U.S. and foreign taxable income and customs duties; (5) taxation of our Members (which in some instances may
impose an obligation on us to collect the taxes and maintain appropriate records); (6) our international operations, such as import/export,
currency exchange, repatriation and anti-bribery regulations; (7) antitrust issues; and (8) privacy and data protection. See Part I, Item 1A,
Risk Factors, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.

   Products
       In the United States, the formulation, manufacturing, packaging, holding, labeling, promotion, advertising, distribution, and sale
of our products are subject to regulation by various federal governmental agencies, including: (1) the FDA; (2) the FTC; (3) the
Consumer Product Safety Commission, or CPSC; (4) the United States Department of Agriculture, or USDA; (5) the Environmental
Protection Agency, or EPA; (6) the United States Postal Service; (7) United States Customs and Border Protection; and (8) the Drug
Enforcement Administration. Our activities also are regulated by various agencies of the states, localities and foreign countries in which
our products are manufactured, distributed, or sold. The FDA, in particular, regulates the formulation, manufacture, and labeling of
over-the-counter, or OTC, drugs, conventional foods, dietary supplements, and cosmetics such as those distributed by us. The majority
of the products marketed by us in the United States are classified as conventional foods or dietary supplements under the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act, or FFDCA. Internationally, the majority of products marketed by us are classified as foods, health supplements,
or food supplements.

       FDA regulations govern the preparation, packaging, labeling, holding, and distribution of foods, OTC drugs, cosmetics, and
dietary supplements. Among other obligations, they require us and our contract manufacturers to meet relevant CGMP regulations for
the preparation, packaging, holding, and distribution of OTC drugs and dietary supplements. The FDA also requires identity testing of
all incoming dietary ingredients used in dietary supplements, unless a company successfully petitions for an exemption from this testing
requirement in accordance with the regulations. The CGMPs are designed to ensure that OTC drugs and dietary supplements are not
adulterated with contaminants or impurities, and are labeled to accurately reflect the active ingredients and other ingredients in the
products. We have implemented a comprehensive quality assurance program that is designed to maintain compliance with the CGMPs
for products manufactured by us or on our behalf for distribution in the United States. As part of this program, we have regularly
implemented enhancements, modifications and improvements to our manufacturing and corporate quality processes. We believe that
we and our contract manufacturers are compliant with the FDA’s CGMPs and other applicable manufacturing regulations in the United
States.

       The U.S. Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994, or DSHEA, revised the provisions of FFDCA concerning the
composition and labeling of dietary supplements. Under DSHEA, dietary supplement labeling may display structure/function claims
that the manufacturer can substantiate, which are claims that the products affect the structure or function of the body, without prior FDA
approval, but with notification to the FDA. They may not bear any claim that they can prevent, treat, cure, mitigate or diagnose disease
(a drug claim). Apart from DSHEA, the agency permits companies to use FDA-approved full and qualified health claims for food and
supplement products containing specific ingredients that meet stated requirements.



                                                                      13
      U.S. law also requires that all serious adverse events occurring within the United States involving dietary supplements or OTC
drugs be reported to the FDA. We believe that we are in compliance with this law having implemented a worldwide procedure governing
adverse event identification, investigation and reporting. As a result of reported adverse events, we may from time to time elect, or be
required, to remove a product from a market, either temporarily or permanently.

       Some of the products marketed by us are considered conventional foods and are currently labeled as such. Within the United
States, this category of products is subject to the federal Nutrition, Labeling and Education Act, or NLEA, and regulations promulgated
under the NLEA. The NLEA regulates health claims, ingredient labeling and nutrient content claims characterizing the level of a nutrient
in the product. The ingredients in conventional foods must either be generally recognized as safe by experts for the purposes to which
they are put in foods, or be approved as food additives under FDA regulations.

      The federal Food Safety Modernization Act, or FSMA, is also applicable to some of our business. We follow a food safety plan
and have implemented preventive measures required by the FSMA. Foreign suppliers of our raw materials are also subject to FSMA
requirements, and we have implemented a verification program to comply with the FSMA. Dietary supplements manufactured in
accordance with CGMPs and foods manufactured in accordance with the low acid food regulations are exempt.

      In foreign markets, prior to commencing operations and prior to making or permitting sales of our products in the market, we may
be required to obtain an approval, license or certification from the relevant country’s ministry of health or comparable agency. Prior to
entering a new market in which a formal approval, license or certificate is required, we work with local authorities in order to obtain the
requisite approvals. The approval process generally requires us to present each product and product ingredient to appropriate regulators
and, in some instances, arrange for testing of products by local technicians for ingredient analysis. The approvals may be conditioned
on reformulation of our products, or may be unavailable with respect to some products or some ingredients.

       The FTC, which exercises jurisdiction over the advertising of all of our products in the United States, has in the past several years
instituted enforcement actions against several dietary supplement and food companies and against manufacturers of weight loss products
generally for false and misleading advertising of some of their products. In addition, the FTC has increased its scrutiny of the use of
testimonials, which we also utilize, as well as the role of expert endorsers and product clinical studies. We cannot be sure that the FTC,
or comparable foreign agencies, will not question our advertising or other operations in the future.

      In Europe, where an EU Health Claim regulation is in effect, the European Food Safety Authority, or EFSA, issued opinions
following its review of a number of proposed claims documents. ESFA’s opinions, which have been accepted by the European
Commission, have limited the use of certain nutrition-specific claims made for foods and food supplements. Accordingly, we revised
affected product labels to ensure regulatory compliance.

      We are subject to a permanent injunction issued in October 1986 pursuant to the settlement of an action instituted by the California
Attorney General, the State Health Director and the Santa Cruz County District Attorney. We consented to the entry of this injunction
without in any way admitting the allegations of the complaint. The injunction prevents us from making specified claims in advertising
of our products, but does not prevent us from continuing to make specified claims concerning our products, provided that we have a
reasonable basis for making the claims. The injunction also prohibits certain recruiting-related investments from Members and mandates
that payments to Members be premised on retail value (as defined); the injunction provides that we may establish a system to verify or
document such compliance.

   Network Marketing Program
       Our network marketing program is subject to a number of federal and state regulations administered by the FTC and various state
regulators as well as regulations in foreign markets administered by foreign regulators. Regulations applicable to network marketing
organizations generally are directed at ensuring that product sales ultimately are made to consumers and that advancement within the
organization is based on sales of the organization’s products rather than investments in the organization or other non-retail sales related
criteria. When required by law, we obtain regulatory approval of our network marketing program or, when this approval is not required,
the favorable opinion of local counsel as to regulatory compliance.




                                                                    14
      On July 15, 2016, we reached a settlement with the FTC and entered into a proposed Stipulation to Entry of Order for Permanent
Injunction and Monetary Judgment, or the Consent Order, which resolved the FTC’s multi-year investigation of us. The Consent Order
became effective on July 25, 2016, or the Effective Date, upon final approval by the U.S. District Court for the Central District of
California. Pursuant to the Consent Order, we implemented and continue to enhance certain procedures in the U.S. and agreed to be
subject to certain audits by an independent compliance auditor (Affiliated Monitors, Inc.) for a period of seven years. Among other
requirements, the Consent Order requires us to categorize all existing and future Members in the U.S. as either “preferred members” –
who are simply consumers who only wish to purchase product for their own household use — or “distributors” – who are Members who
wish to resell some products or build a sales organization. We also agreed to compensate distributors on U.S. eligible sales within their
downline organizations, which include purchases by preferred members, purchases by a distributor for his or her personal consumption
within allowable limits and sales of product by a distributor to his or her customers. The Consent Order also requires distributors to meet
certain conditions before opening Nutrition Clubs and/or entering into leases for their Herbalife Nutrition business in the United States.

       The Consent Order also prohibits us from making expressly or by implication, any misrepresentation regarding certain lifestyles
or amount or level of income, including full-time or part-time income that a participant can reasonably expect to earn in our network
marketing program. The Consent Order also prohibits us and other persons who act in active concert with us from misrepresenting that
participation in the network marketing program will result in a lavish lifestyle and from using images or descriptions to represent or
imply that participation in the program is likely to result in a lavish lifestyle. In addition, the Consent Order prohibits specified
misrepresentations in connection with marketing the program, including misrepresentations regarding any fact material to participation
such as the cost to participate or the amount of income likely to be earned. The Consent Order also requires us to clearly and
conspicuously disclose information related to our refund and buyback policy on certain company materials and websites.

       The terms of the Consent Order do not change our going to market through direct selling by independent distributors, and
compensating those distributors based upon the product they and their sales organization sell. We have implemented new and enhanced
procedures required by the terms of the Consent Order and will continue to do so. We continue to monitor the impact of the Consent
Order and our board of directors originally established the Implementation Oversight Committee in connection with monitoring
compliance with the Consent Order, and more recently, our Audit Committee assumed oversight of continued compliance with the
Consent Order. While we currently do not expect the Consent Order to have a long-term and material adverse impact on our business
and our Member base, our business and our Member base, particularly in the U.S., have been in the past, and may in the future, be
negatively impacted as we and they adjust to the changes. However, the terms of the Consent Order and the ongoing costs of compliance
may adversely affect our business operations, our results of operations, and our financial condition. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors,
of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of risks related to the settlement with the FTC.

      On January 4, 2018, the FTC released its nonbinding Business Guidance Concerning Multi-Level Marketing, or MLM Guidance.
The MLM Guidance explains, among other things, lawful and unlawful compensation structures, the treatment of personal consumption
by participants in determining if an MLM’s compensation structure is unfair or deceptive, and how an MLM should approach
representations to current and prospective participants. We believe our current business practices, which include new and enhanced
procedures implemented in connection with the Consent Order, are in compliance with the MLM Guidance.

      Additionally, the FTC has promulgated nonbinding Guides Concerning the Use of Endorsements and Testimonials in Advertising,
or Guides, which explain how the FTC interprets Section 5 of the FTC Act’s prohibition on unfair or deceptive acts or practices.
Consequently, the FTC could bring a Section 5 enforcement action based on practices that are inconsistent with the Guides. Under the
Guides, advertisements that feature a consumer and convey his or her atypical experience with a product or service are required to
clearly disclose the typical results that consumers can generally expect. The revised Guides also require advertisers to disclose
connections between the advertiser and any endorsers that consumers might not expect, known as “material connections.” We have
adapted our practices and rules regarding the practices of our Members to comply with the Guides and to comply with the Consent
Order.

      We also are subject to the risk of private party challenges to the legality of our network marketing program both in the United
States and internationally. For example, in Webster v. Omnitrition International, Inc., 79 F.3d 776 (9th Cir. 1996), the network
marketing program of Omnitrition International, Inc., or Omnitrition, was challenged in a class action by Omnitrition distributors who
alleged that it was operating an illegal “pyramid scheme” in violation of federal and state laws. We believe that our network marketing
program satisfies federal and other applicable state statutes and case law.

       In some countries, regulations applicable to the activities of our Members also may affect our business because in some countries
we are, or regulators may assert that we are, responsible for our Members’ conduct. In these countries, regulators may request or require
that we take steps to ensure that our Members comply with local regulations. The types of regulated conduct include: (1) representations
concerning our products; (2) income representations made by us and/or Members; (3) public media advertisements, which in foreign
markets may require prior approval by regulators; (4) sales of products in markets in which the products have not been approved, licensed
or certified for sale; and (5) classification by government agencies of our Members as employees of the Company.

                                                                    15
      In some markets, it is possible that improper product claims by Members could result in our products being reviewed by regulatory
authorities and, as a result, being classified or placed into another category as to which stricter regulations are applicable. In addition,
we might be required to make labeling changes.

      We also are subject to regulations in various foreign markets pertaining to social security assessments and employment and
severance pay requirements. As an example, in some markets, we are substantially restricted in the amount and types of rules and
termination criteria that we can impose on Members without having to pay social security assessments on behalf of the Members and
without incurring severance obligations to terminated Members. In some countries, we may be subject to these obligations in any event.

       It is an ongoing part of our business to monitor and respond to regulatory and legal developments, including those that may affect
our network marketing program. However, the regulatory requirements concerning network marketing programs do not include bright
line rules and are inherently fact-based. An adverse judicial or regulatory determination with respect to our network marketing program
could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and operating results and may also result in negative publicity,
requirements to modify our network marketing program, or a negative impact on Member morale. In addition, adverse rulings by courts
in any proceedings challenging the legality of network marketing systems, even in those not involving us directly, could have a material
adverse effect on our operations.

      Although questions regarding the legality of our network marketing program have come up in the past and may come up from
time to time in the future, we believe, based in part upon guidance to the general public from the FTC, that our network marketing
program is compliant with applicable law.

   Income Tax, Transfer Pricing, and Other Taxes
      In many countries, including the United States, we are subject to income tax, transfer pricing and other tax regulations designed
to ensure that appropriate levels of income are reported as earned by our U.S. and local entities and are taxed accordingly. In addition,
our operations are subject to regulations designed to ensure that appropriate levels of customs duties are assessed on the importation of
our products.

       Although we believe that we are in substantial compliance with all applicable tax rules, regulations, and restrictions, we are subject
to the risk that governmental authorities could assert that additional taxes are owed based on findings of their audit. For example, we
are currently subject to pending or proposed audits that are at various levels of review, assessment or appeal in a number of jurisdictions
involving transfer pricing issues, income taxes, duties, value added taxes, withholding taxes and related interest and penalties in material
amounts. In some circumstances, additional taxes, interest and penalties have been assessed, and we will be required to appeal or litigate
to reverse the assessments. We have taken advice from our tax advisors and believe that there are substantial defenses to the allegations
that additional taxes are owed, and we are vigorously defending against the imposition of additional proposed taxes. The ultimate
resolution of these matters may take several years, and the outcome is uncertain.

       In the event that the audits or assessments are concluded adversely, we may or may not be able to offset or mitigate the consolidated
effect of foreign income tax assessments through the use of U.S. foreign tax credits. The laws and regulations governing U.S. foreign
tax credits are complex and subject to periodic legislative amendment, and there are restrictions on the utilization of U.S. foreign tax
credits. Therefore, we cannot be sure that we would in fact be able to take advantage of any foreign tax credits in the future.

   Compliance Procedures
       As indicated above, Herbalife Nutrition, our products and our network marketing program are subject, both directly and indirectly
through Members’ conduct, to numerous federal, state and local regulations, in the United States and foreign markets. In 1985, we began
to institute formal compliance measures by developing a system to identify specific complaints against Members and to remedy any
violations of Herbalife Nutrition’s rules by Members through appropriate sanctions, including warnings, fines, suspensions and, when
necessary, terminations. We prohibit Members from making therapeutic claims for our products or misrepresentations regarding
participating in our network marketing program, including in our manuals, seminars, and other training programs and materials.

      Our general policy is to reject Member applications from individuals who do not reside in one of our approved markets.




                                                                     16
      In order to comply with regulations that apply to both us and our Members, we research the applicable regulatory framework prior
to entering any new market to identify necessary licenses and approvals and applicable limitations relating to our operations in that
market and then work to bring our operations into compliance with the applicable limitations and to maintain such licenses. Typically,
we conduct this research with the assistance of local legal counsel and other representatives. We also research laws applicable to Member
operations and revise or alter our Member applications, rules, and other training materials and programs to provide Members with
guidelines for operating their independent business, marketing and distributing our products and similar matters, as required by
applicable regulations in each market. While we have rules and guidelines for our Members and monitor their market conduct, we are,
however, unable to ensure that our Members will not distribute our products in countries where we have not commenced operations.

       In addition, regulations in existing and new markets often are ambiguous and subject to considerable interpretive and enforcement
discretion by the responsible regulators. Moreover, even when we believe that we and our Members are in compliance with all applicable
regulations, new regulations are being added regularly and the interpretation of existing regulations is subject to change. Further, the
content and impact of regulations to which we are subject may be influenced by public attention directed at us, our products, or our
network marketing program, so that extensive adverse publicity about us, our products, or our network marketing program may increase
the likelihood regulatory scrutiny or action.

HUMAN CAPITAL
      At Herbalife Nutrition, our commitment to improving lives and our communities is at the core of everything we do. This
commitment also informs how we value and treat our employees. We seek to provide a work environment where employees can grow
and thrive while supporting our Members and their customers. We believe attracting, developing, and retaining a talented and diverse
workforce are critical factors that contribute to the success and growth of our business.
       We have operations globally, requiring investment to assess local labor market conditions and recruit and retain the appropriate
workforce. Having a business presence in multiple domestic and international markets also requires us to monitor local labor and
employment laws for which we often engage third-party advisors. We monitor the talent needs of our departments and functions with
particular focus on the areas where human capital resources are important to daily operations to ensure we can timely manufacture,
distribute, and sell products to our Members. As of December 31, 2022, we had approximately 10,100 employees, of which
approximately 2,800 were located in the United States.

   Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
       We believe diversity is a strength and embrace a core vision that a diverse, equitable, and inclusive culture is imperative to enable
us to better serve our Members, stakeholders, and communities. As such, we seek to promote a work environment where all people can
thrive, and are committed to diversity, equity, and inclusion, or DEI, at all levels, from our employees, management and executive
leadership to our board of directors.

       Our DEI strategy is currently focused on creating opportunities to further recruit and support diverse talent at all levels,
encouraging inclusion and belonging, and embedding equity throughout our culture and operations. Current initiatives include the
implementation of a global applicant tracking system to deepen our commitment to fair recruitment processes, offering unconscious
bias trainings for all employees, the expansion of existing employee networks which help employees build community and foster a
culture of belonging, and further development and involvement of Global and Regional DEI Councils to drive DEI progress.
Additionally, we have set diversity goals and targets for women in leadership roles globally and for racial and ethnic minorities in
leadership roles in the U.S.

   Talent Acquisition and Development
      We seek to attract and retain a talented and diverse workforce. To foster an inclusive hiring process in the U.S., we use a tool that
helps ensure that job descriptions do not unintentionally exclude potential applicants.

      Investment in our employees' professional growth and development is important and helps establish a strong foundation for long-
term success. At our Company, we strive to create a learning culture, one in which development is an ongoing focus for all employees
and managers. We invest in our employees’ development through a variety of programs. These programs are designed to help our
employees grow professionally and strengthen their skills throughout their careers. Examples of these programs include the following:
      •     Training Programs – We provide our employees access to an internal learning management system, Herbalife Nutrition
            University, which provides professional development courses, technical training, and compliance training to all employees
            globally.



                                                                    17
      •     Mentorship Programs – The principle of servant leadership is a crucial part of our culture. We believe that one way to be a
            servant leader is to mentor others, and, in 2020, we introduced a new mentorship program to help guide junior employees
            in their professional journey. Through this program, participating employees can be provided with a one-on-one professional
            development opportunity, in which they receive dedicated coaching, feedback, and encouragement.
      •     Educational Assistance – Another way we support employees’ continual professional development is by offsetting a portion
            of the cost of higher education. Program offerings and eligibility vary by region, but may include partial reimbursement of
            tuition fees incurred for undergraduate and graduate degrees, certificate programs, or skills-based courses.

   Compensation and Benefits
      Our Board of Directors and its Compensation Committee establish our general compensation philosophy and oversee and approve
the development, adoption, and implementation of compensation policies and programs, which are set at a global level, but also adapted
to meet local country requirements as needed. We provide base pay that aligns with employee positions, skill levels, experience,
contributions, and geographic location. In addition to base pay, we seek to reward employees with annual incentive awards, recognition
programs, and equity awards for employees at certain job grades. Our benefit programs are designed to enhance employee well-being
and assist employees in the event of illness, injury, or disability. To this end, we offer benefits that vary worldwide, but may include
health insurance, retirement savings programs, and wellness incentives designed to promote a healthy and active lifestyle. We believe
we offer our employees wages and benefits packages that are in line with respective local labor markets and laws.

   Safety, Health, and Well-Being
       As a nutrition company, we believe the safety, health, and well-being of our employees is of the utmost importance. We endeavor
to promote these principles by providing a safe and healthy work environment and encouraging healthy, active lifestyles. Our efforts to
provide a safe workplace are guided by various formal policies and programs, which are designed to protect employees, contractors,
and visitors from accidents, illnesses, and injuries, while operating in compliance with applicable regulations, including OSHA
guidelines in the U.S. We also follow policies and programs regarding material health and safety risks, workplace violence prevention,
and incident response and management. In the U.S., our manufacturing facilities in Winston-Salem and Lake Forest are ISO 45001
certified, an international standard for occupational health and safety management.

      While the COVID-19 pandemic has increased the resources required to keep our employees safe and healthy, we continue to make
what we believe are the necessary investments to achieve this goal. In response to, and during various phases of, the pandemic, we have
taken several actions, including supporting our employees to work from home when possible, offering mental and emotional wellness
resources, and implementing safety measures when necessary at our facilities. Over the course of the pandemic, our senior management
team has relied on cross-functional teams to monitor, review, and assess the evolving situation. These cross-functional teams are
responsible for recommending risk mitigation actions based on the local risks and in accordance with regulatory requirements and
guidelines for the health and safety of our employees and, in the U.S., protocols to align with all federal, state, and local public health
guidelines. We believe our proactive efforts have been successful in supporting our business growth despite the obstacles and challenges
presented by COVID-19.

       In addition, we believe in the importance of well-being and provide resources for our employees that support their pursuit of a
healthy and active lifestyle. Our flagship wellness program in the U.S., “Wellness for Life,” offers employees a suite of activities to
achieve overall wellness through improved fitness, nutrition, intellectual well-being, and financial literacy. The variety of activities
offered ensures all employees may participate, no matter where they may be in their wellness journey. While we have many existing
regional wellness programs, a new and enhanced global wellness program will launch in January 2023 and feature Herbalife fitness,
health and nutrition experts from around the globe. We also have facilities and programs in place that allow employees to incorporate
fitness into their daily schedule, such as onsite gyms at several facilities and live virtual classes.

   Our Members
      We are dependent on our Members to sell and promote our products to their customers. We frequently interact and work directly
with our sales leaders to explore ways to support our and our Members’ businesses, and their customers’ personal goals of living a
healthier and more active lifestyle. See the Our Network Marketing Program – Member Compensation and Sales Leader Retention and
Requalification section above for sales leader and requalification metrics and further discussion on our sales leaders.




                                                                    18
Available Information
      Our Internet website address is www.herbalife.com and our investor relations website is ir.herbalife.com. We make available free
of charge on our website our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, proxy
statements, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, as soon as reasonably practical after we file such material with, or furnish it to, the Securities
and Exchange Commission, or SEC. The SEC maintains an Internet website that contains reports, proxy and information statements,
and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC at www.sec.gov. We also make available free of charge on
our investor relations website at ir.herbalife.com our Principles of Corporate Governance, our Code of Conduct, and the Charters of our
Audit Committee, Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee, Compensation Committee, and ESG Committee of our board of
directors. Unless expressly noted, the information on our website, including our investor relations website, or any other website is not
incorporated by reference in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and should not be considered part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
or any other filing we make with the SEC.

Item 1A.    Risk Factors
      Please carefully consider the following discussion of significant factors, events, and uncertainties that make an investment
decision regarding our securities risky. The factors, events, uncertainties, and consequences discussed in these risk factors could, in
circumstances we may not be able to accurately predict, recognize, or control, have a material adverse effect on our business, reputation,
prospects, financial condition, operating results, cash flows, liquidity, and share price. These risk factors do not identify all risks that
we face. We could also be affected by factors, events, or uncertainties that are not presently known to us or that we currently do not
consider to present material risks.

      Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has amplified many of the other risks discussed below to which we are subject. We are
unable to predict the duration and extent to which the pandemic and its related impacts will adversely impact our business, financial
condition, and operating results as well as our share price. In addition, given the unpredictable, unprecedented, and fluid nature of the
pandemic, it may also materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, and operating results in ways that are not
currently anticipated by or known to us or that we currently do not consider to present material risks.

                                                          Risk Factor Summary
       This risk factor summary contains a high-level summary of certain of the principal factors, events and uncertainties that make an
investment in our securities risky, including risks related to our business and industry, risks related to regulatory and legal matters, risks
related to our international operations, risks related to our indebtedness and risks related to our common shares. The following summary
is not complete and should be read together with the more detailed discussion of these and the other factors, events, and uncertainties
set forth below before making an investment decision regarding our securities. The principal factors, events, and uncertainties that make
an investment in our securities risky include the following:

Risks Related to Our Business and Industry
      •     Our failure to establish and maintain Member and sales leader relationships could negatively impact sales of our products
            and materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      •     Because we cannot exert the same level of influence or control over our Members as we could if they were our employees,
            our Members could fail to comply with applicable law or our rules and procedures, which could result in claims against us
            that could materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      •     Adverse publicity associated with our Company or the direct-selling industry could materially harm our business, financial
            condition, and operating results.
      •     Our failure to compete successfully could materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      •     Our contractual obligation to sell our products only through our Member network and to refrain from changing certain
            aspects of our Marketing Plan may limit our growth.
      •     Our failure to appropriately respond to changing consumer trends, preferences, and demand for new products and product
            enhancements could materially harm our Member relationships, our Members’ customer relationships, and product sales or
            otherwise materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      •     If we fail to further penetrate existing markets, the growth in sales of our products, along with our operating results could
            be negatively impacted.


                                                                     19
     •     Since one of our products constitutes a significant portion of our net sales, significant decreases in consumer demand for
           this product or our failure to produce a suitable replacement, could materially harm our business, financial condition, and
           operating results.
     •     Our business could be materially and adversely affected by natural disasters, other catastrophic events, acts of war or
           terrorism, cybersecurity incidents, pandemics, and/or other acts by third parties.
     •     We depend on the integrity and reliability of our information technology infrastructure, and any related interruptions or
           inadequacies may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and operating results.
     •     Disruption of supply, shortage, or increases in the cost of ingredients, packaging materials, and other raw materials as well
           as climate change could materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
     •     If any of our manufacturing facilities or third-party manufacturers fail to reliably supply products to us at required levels of
           quality or fail to comply with applicable laws, our financial condition and operating results could be materially and adversely
           impacted.
     •     If we lose the services of members of our senior management team, our business, financial condition, and operating results
           could be materially harmed.
     •     Our share price may be adversely affected by third parties who raise allegations about our Company.
     •     ESG matters, including those related to climate change and sustainability, may have an adverse effect on our business,
           financial condition, and operating results and may damage our reputation.

Risks Related to Regulatory and Legal Matters
     •     Our products are affected by extensive regulations, and our failure or our Members’ failure to comply with any regulations
           could lead to significant penalties or claims, which could materially harm our financial condition and operating results.
     •     Our network marketing program is subject to extensive regulation and scrutiny and any failure to comply, or alteration to
           our compensation practices in order to comply, with these regulations could materially harm our business, financial
           condition, and operating results.
     •     We are subject to the Consent Order with the FTC, the effects of which, or any failure to comply therewith, could materially
           harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
     •     Our actual or perceived failure to comply with privacy and data protection laws, rules, and regulations could materially
           harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
     •     We are subject to material product liability risks, which could increase our costs and materially harm our business, financial
           condition, and operating results.
     •     If we fail to protect our intellectual property, our ability to compete could be negatively affected, which could materially
           harm our financial condition and operating results.
     •     If we infringe the intellectual property rights of others, our business, financial condition, and operating results could be
           materially harmed.
     •     We may be held responsible for additional compensation, certain taxes, or assessments relating to the activities of our
           Members, which could materially harm our financial condition and operating results.

Risks Related to Our International Operations
     •     A substantial portion of our business is conducted in foreign jurisdictions, exposing us to the risks associated with
           international operations.
     •     We are subject to the anti-bribery laws, rules, and regulations of the United States and the other foreign jurisdictions in
           which we operate.
     •     If we do not comply with transfer pricing, customs duties VAT, and similar regulations, we may be subject to additional
           taxes, customs duties, interest, and penalties in material amounts, which could materially harm our financial condition and
           operating results.
     •     Our business in China is subject to general, as well as industry-specific, economic, political, and legal developments and
           risks and requires that we utilize a modified version of the business model we use elsewhere in the world.
     •     The United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union could adversely impact us.

                                                                   20
Risks Related to Our Indebtedness
      •     The terms and covenants in our existing indebtedness could limit our discretion with respect to certain business matters,
            which could harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      •     The conversion or maturity of our convertible notes may adversely affect our financial condition and operating results, and
            their conversion into common shares could have a dilutive effect that could cause our share price to go down.

Risks Related to Our Common Shares
      •     Holders of our common shares may difficulties in protecting their interests because we are incorporated under Cayman
            Islands law.
      •     Provisions of our articles of association and Cayman Islands law may impede a takeover or make it more difficult for
            shareholders to change the direction or management of the Company, which could reduce shareholders’ opportunity to
            influence management of the Company.
      •     There is uncertainty as to shareholders’ ability to enforce certain foreign civil liabilities in the Cayman Islands.
      •     U.S. Tax Reform may adversely impact certain U.S. shareholders of the Company.

                                             Risks Related to Our Business and Industry
   Our failure to establish and maintain Member and sales leader relationships could negatively impact sales of our products and
   materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
       We distribute our products exclusively to and through our independent Members, and we depend on them directly for substantially
all of our sales. To increase our revenue, we must increase the number and productivity of our Members. Accordingly, our success
depends in significant part on our relationships with our sales leaders and our ability to recruit, retain, and motivate a large base of
Members, including through an attractive compensation plan, the quality of our reputation, the maintenance of an attractive product
portfolio, the breadth and quality of our Member services, and other incentives. The loss of a significant number of Members, changes
to our network marketing program, our inability to respond to Member demand or generate sufficient interest in our business
opportunities, products, or services, decreases in Member engagement, loss of Member or consumer confidence, or any legal or
regulatory impact to our Members’ ability to conduct their business could negatively impact sales of our products and our ability to
attract and retain Members, each of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and operating
results. In our efforts to attract and retain Members, we compete with other direct-selling organizations. In addition, our Member
organization has a high turnover rate, which is common in the direct-selling industry, in part because our Members, including our sales
leaders, may easily enter and exit our network marketing program without facing a significant investment or loss of capital. For example,
the upfront financial cost to become a Member is low, we do not have time or exclusivity requirements, we do not charge for any
required training, and, in substantially all jurisdictions, we maintain a buyback program.

       We believe the COVID-19 pandemic could have an adverse impact on the pipeline of new Members and our Member turnover
rate, and may impact our future net sales. See the COVID-19 Pandemic and Sales by Geographic Region sections in Part II, Item 7,
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for
further discussion of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and results of operations. For additional information
regarding sales leader retention rates, see Part I, Item 1, Business, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.

   Because we cannot exert the same level of influence or control over our Members as we could if they were our employees, our
   Members could fail to comply with applicable law or our rules and procedures, which could result in claims against us that could
   materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      Our Members are independent contractors and, accordingly, we are not in a position to provide the same direction, motivation,
and oversight as we could if Members were our employees. As a result, there can be no assurance that our Members will participate in
our marketing strategies or plans, accept our introduction of new products, or comply with applicable legal requirements or our rules
and procedures.




                                                                    21
       We are subject to extensive federal, state, local, and foreign laws, rules, and regulations that regulate our business, products, direct
sales channel, and network marketing program. See the Regulation section of Part I, Item 1, Business, of this Annual Report on Form 10-
K for additional information. While we have implemented policies and procedures designed to govern Member conduct and to protect
the goodwill associated with Herbalife Nutrition, it can be difficult to enforce these policies and procedures because of our large number
of Members and their status as independent contractors and because our policies and procedures differ by jurisdiction as a result of
varying local legal requirements. In addition, although we train our Members and attempt to monitor our Members’ marketing materials,
we cannot ensure that our Members will comply with applicable legal requirements or our policies and procedures or that such marketing
materials or other Member practices comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. It is possible that a court could hold us liable
for the actions of our Members, which could materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.

   Adverse publicity associated with our Company or the direct-selling industry could materially harm our business, financial
   condition, and operating results.
       Our reputation and the quality of our brand are critical to our business, and the size and success of our Member organization, our
operating results, and our share price may be significantly affected by the public’s perception of Herbalife Nutrition and other direct-
selling companies. This perception is dependent upon opinions concerning a number of factors, including:
      •     the safety, quality, and efficacy of our products, as well as those of similar companies;
      •     our Members;
      •     our network marketing program or the attractiveness or viability of the financial opportunities it may provide;
      •     the direct-selling business generally;
      •     actual or purported failure by us or our Members to comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including those
            regarding product claims and advertising, good manufacturing practices, the regulation of our network marketing program,
            the registration of our products for sale in our target markets, or other aspects of our business;
      •     our commitment to ESG matters and our ESG practices;
      •     the security of our information technology infrastructure; and
      •     actual or alleged impropriety, misconduct, or fraudulent activity by any person formerly or currently associated with our
            Members or us.

       Adverse publicity concerning any of the foregoing whether or not accurate or resulting in investigation, enforcement, or other
legal or regulatory actions or the imposition of fines, penalties, or other sanctions, could negatively impact our reputation, our ability to
attract, motivate, and retain Members, and our ability to generate revenue.

      In addition, our Members’ and consumers’ perception of Herbalife Nutrition and our direct-selling business as well as similar
companies can be significantly influenced by media attention, publicized scientific research or findings, product liability claims, and
other publicity, whether or not it is legitimate. For example, as a result of the prevalence and marked increase in the use of blogs, social
media platforms, and other forms of Internet-based communications, the opportunity for dissemination of information, both accurate
and inaccurate, is seemingly limitless and readily available, and often does not provide any opportunity for correction or other redress.

      Adverse publicity that associates use of our products or any similar products with adverse effects, questions the quality or benefits
of any such products, or claims that any such products are ineffective, inappropriately labeled, or have inaccurate instructions as to their
use, could lead to lawsuits or other legal or regulatory challenges and could materially and adversely impact our reputation, the demand
for our products, and our business, financial condition, and operating results.

       Adverse publicity relating to us has had, and could again have, a negative effect on our ability to attract, motivate, and retain
Members, on consumer perception of Herbalife Nutrition, and on our share price. For example, the resulting adverse publicity from the
1986 permanent injunction entered in California caused a rapid, substantial loss of Members in the United States and a corresponding
reduction in sales beginning in 1985. See also the risk factor titled “Our share price may be adversely affected by third parties who raise
allegations about our Company.” We expect that adverse publicity will, from time to time, continue to negatively impact our business
in particular markets and may adversely affect our share price.




                                                                      22
   Our failure to compete successfully could materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
       The business of developing and marketing weight management and other nutrition and personal care products is highly
competitive and sensitive to the introduction of new products and weight management plans, including various prescription drugs, which
may rapidly capture a significant share of the market. Our competitors include numerous manufacturers; distributors; marketers; online,
specialty, mass, and other retailers; and physicians that actively compete for the business of consumers both in the United States and
abroad. Some of our competitors have longer operating histories, significantly greater resources, better-developed and more innovative
sales and distribution channels and platforms, greater name recognition, and larger established customer bases than we do. Our present
and future competitors may be able to offer products at lower prices or better withstand reductions in prices or other adverse economic
or market conditions than we can; develop products that are comparable or superior to those we offer; adapt more quickly or effectively
to new technologies, changing regulatory requirements, evolving industry trends and standards, and customer requirements than we can;
and/or devote greater resources to the development, promotion, and sale of their products than we do. We are also subject to significant
competition for the recruitment of Members from other direct-selling organizations, including those that market weight management
products, dietary and nutritional supplements, personal care products, and other types of products, as well as those organizations in
which former employees or Members are involved. In addition, because the industry in which we operate is not particularly capital
intensive or otherwise subject to high barriers to entry, it is relatively easy for new competitors to emerge that will compete with us,
including for our Members and their customers. Accordingly, competition may intensify and we may not be able to compete effectively
in our markets. If we are not able to retain our Members and their customers or otherwise compete successfully, our business, financial
condition, and operating results would be materially adversely affected.

   Our contractual obligation to sell our products only through our Member network and to refrain from changing certain aspects
   of our Marketing Plan may limit our growth.
       We are contractually prohibited from expanding our business by selling Herbalife Nutrition products through other distribution
channels that may be available to our competitors, such as over the Internet, through wholesale sales, by establishing retail stores, or
through mail order systems. To the extent legally permitted, an agreement we entered into with our Members provides assurances that
we will not sell Herbalife Nutrition products worldwide through any distribution channel other than our network of Members. Since this
is an open-ended commitment, there can be no assurance that we will be able to take advantage of innovative new distribution channels
that are developed in the future or appropriately respond to consumer preferences as they continue to evolve.

       In addition, this agreement with our Members provides that we will not make any material changes adverse to our Members to
certain aspects of our Marketing Plan that may negatively impact our Members without their approval as described in further detail
below. For example, our agreement with our Members provides that we may increase, but not decrease, the discount percentages
available to our Members for the purchase of products or the applicable royalty override percentages and production and other bonus
percentages available to our Members at various qualification levels within our Member hierarchy. We may not modify the eligibility
or qualification criteria for these discounts, royalty overrides, and production and other bonuses unless we do so in a manner to make
eligibility and/or qualification easier than under the applicable criteria in effect as of the date of the agreement. Our agreement with our
Members further provides that we may not vary the criteria for qualification for each Member tier within our Member hierarchy, unless
we do so in such a way so as to make qualification easier.

      We reserved the right to make changes to our Marketing Plan without the consent of our Members in the event that changes are
required by applicable law or are necessary in our reasonable business judgment to account for specific local market or currency
conditions to achieve a reasonable profit on operations. In addition, we may initiate other changes that are adverse to our Members based
on an assessment of what will be best for the Company and its Members. Under the agreement with our Members, these other adverse
changes would then be submitted to our Member leadership for a vote. The vote would require the approval of at least 51% of our
Members then at the level of President’s Team earning at the production bonus level of 6% who vote, provided that at least 50% of those
Members entitled to vote do in fact vote. While we believe this agreement has strengthened our relationship with our existing Members,
improved our ability to recruit new Members, and generally increased the long-term stability of our business, there can be no assurance
that our agreement with our Members will not restrict our ability to adapt our Marketing Plan or our business to the evolving
requirements of the markets in which we operate. As a result, our growth may be limited.




                                                                    23
   Our failure to appropriately respond to changing consumer trends, preferences, and demand for new products and product
   enhancements could materially harm our Member relationships, Members’ customer relationships, and product sales or
   otherwise materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      Our business is subject to rapidly changing consumer trends and preferences and product introductions, especially with respect to
our nutrition products. Our continued success depends in part on our ability to anticipate and respond to these changes and introductions,
and we may not respond or develop new products or product enhancements in a cost-effective, timely, or commercially appropriate
manner, or at all, particularly while the COVID-19 pandemic persists. Current consumer trends and preferences have evolved and will
continue to evolve as a result of, among other things, changes in consumer tastes; health, wellness, and nutrition considerations;
competitive product and pricing pressures; changes in consumer preferences for certain sales channels; shifts in demographics; and
concerns regarding the environmental and sustainability impact of the product manufacturing process.

      The success of our response to changing consumer trends and preferences and product introductions, including any new product
offerings and enhancements, depends on a number of factors, including our ability to:
      •     accurately anticipate consumer needs;
      •     innovate and develop new products and product enhancements that meet these needs;
      •     successfully commercialize new products and product enhancements;
      •     price our products competitively;
      •     manufacture and deliver our products in sufficient volumes, at our required levels of quality, and in a cost-effective and
            timely manner; and
      •     differentiate our product offerings from those of our competitors and successfully respond to other competitive pressures,
            including technological advancements, evolving industry standards, and changing regulatory requirements.

      Our failure to accurately predict changes in consumer demand and technological advancements could negatively impact consumer
opinion of our products or our business, which in turn could harm our Member relationships and the Members’ relationships with their
customers, and cause a loss of sales. In addition, if we do not introduce new products or make enhancements to meet the changing needs
of our Members and their customers in a cost-effective, timely, and commercially appropriate manner, or if our competitors release new
products or product enhancements before we do, some of our product offerings could be rendered obsolete, which could cause our
market share to decline and negatively impact our business, financial condition, and operating results.

   If we fail to further penetrate existing markets, the growth in sales of our products, along with our operating results, could be
   negatively impacted.
       The success of our business is to a large extent contingent on our ability to further penetrate existing markets, which is subject to
numerous factors, many of which are out of our control. Our ability to increase market penetration may be limited by the finite number
of persons in a given country inclined to pursue a direct-selling business opportunity or consumers aware of, or willing to purchase,
Herbalife Nutrition products. Moreover, our growth in existing markets will depend upon increased brand awareness and improved
training and other activities that enhance Member retention in our markets. While we have recently experienced significant growth in
certain of our foreign markets, we cannot assure you that such growth levels will continue in the immediate or long-term future.
Furthermore, our efforts to support growth in such foreign markets could be hampered to the extent that our infrastructure in such
markets is deficient when compared to our infrastructure in our more developed markets, such as the United States. For example, there
can be no assurances that we will be able to successfully manage expansion of manufacturing operations and a growing and dynamic
sales force in China. If we are unable to effectively scale our supply chain and manufacturing infrastructure to support future growth in
China or other foreign markets, our operations in such markets may be adversely impacted. Therefore, we cannot assure you that our
general efforts to increase our market penetration and Member retention in existing markets will be successful. If we are unable to
further penetrate existing markets, our business, financial condition, and operating results could materially suffer.

   Since one of our products constitutes a significant portion of our net sales, significant decreases in consumer demand for this
   product or our failure to produce a suitable replacement could materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating
   results.
      Our Formula 1 Healthy Meal, which is our best-selling product line, approximated 26% of our net sales for the year ended
December 31, 2022. If consumer demand for this product decreases significantly or we cease offering this product without a suitable
replacement, or if the replacement product fails to gain market acceptance, our business, financial condition, and operating results could
be materially harmed.


                                                                    24
   Our business could be materially and adversely affected by natural disasters, other catastrophic events, acts of war or terrorism,
   cybersecurity incidents, pandemics, and/or other acts by third parties.
        We depend on the ability of our business to run smoothly, including the ability of Members to engage in their day-to-day selling
and business building activities. In coordination with our suppliers, third-party manufacturers, and distributors, our ability to make and
move our products reasonably unimpeded around the world is critical to our success. Any material disruption to our collective operations
or supply, manufacturing, or distribution capabilities caused by unforeseen or catastrophic events, such as (i) natural disasters or severe
weather conditions, including droughts, fires, floods, hurricanes, volcanic eruptions, and earthquakes; (ii) power loss or shortages;
(iii) telecommunications or information technology infrastructure failures; (iv) acts or threats of war, terrorism, or other armed
hostilities; (v) outbreaks of contagious diseases, epidemics, and pandemics; (vi) cybersecurity incidents, including intentional or
inadvertent exposure of content perceived to be sensitive data; (vii) employee misconduct or error; and/or (viii) other actions by third
parties and other similar disruptions, could materially adversely affect our ability to conduct business and our Members’ selling
activities. For example, our operations in Central America were impacted in November 2020 when Hurricanes Eta and Iota made landfall
in the region. The storms disrupted our supply chain transportation network and our ability to import product. In addition, our distribution
center in Honduras experienced flooding, which damaged or destroyed product. Furthermore, our headquarters and one of our
distribution facilities and manufacturing facilities are located in Southern California, an area susceptible to fires and earthquakes.
Although the events in Central America did not have a material negative impact on our operations, we cannot make assurances that any
future catastrophic events will not adversely affect our ability to operate our business or our financial condition and operating results.
In addition, catastrophic events may result in significant cancellations or cessations of Member orders; contribute to a general decrease
in local, regional, or global economic activity; directly impact our marketing, manufacturing, financial, or logistics functions; impair
our ability to meet Member demands; harm our reputation; and expose us to significant liability, losses, and legal proceedings, any of
which could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, and operating results.

       In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic
has significantly impacted health and economic conditions globally, disrupted global supply chains, and has adversely affected the
Company’s business and that of its Members in certain of the Company’s markets and may continue to impact those markets or others
in the future. Government, agency, and other regulatory recommendations, guidelines, mandates, and actions to address public health
concerns, including restrictions on movement, public gatherings, and travel and restrictions on, or in certain cases outright prohibitions
of, companies’ ability to conduct normal business operations, have and may continue to adversely affect our business. Although we
have been classified as an essential business in most jurisdictions where we operate, there is no guarantee that this classification will not
change. We may also be forced to or voluntarily elect to limit or cease operations in one or more markets for other reasons, such as the
health and safety of our employees or because of disruptions in the operation of our supply chain and sources of supply. For example,
it is possible that closures of our manufacturing facilities or those of our third-party contract manufacturers or suppliers could impact
our distribution centers and our ability to manufacture and deliver products to our Members. In general, our inventory of products
continues to be adequate to meet demand, but we do expect our supply chain and our ability to source and/or manufacture products will
be negatively impacted if the negative effects of the pandemic continue for a prolonged period of time or worsen. The pandemic has had
an adverse impact on our distribution channels and Members’ product access in some markets, which may, and in some cases will,
continue until conditions improve. Our third-party contract manufacturers and suppliers and our Members’ businesses are also subject
to many of the same risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other pandemic-related risks and uncertainties
that may not directly impact our operations, any of which could adversely affect demand for our products. For example, limitations on
public gatherings have restricted our Members’ ability to hold meetings with their existing customers and to attract new customers.
Significant limitations on cash transactions could also have an adverse effect on sales of products in certain markets.

       The COVID-19 pandemic has also adversely affected the economies and financial markets of many countries, at times causing a
significant deceleration of or interruption to economic activity, which during various stages of the pandemic has reduced production,
decreased demand for a broad variety of goods and services, diminished trade levels, and led to widespread corporate downsizing. We
have also seen periods of significant disruption of and extreme volatility in the global capital markets, which could increase the cost of,
or entirely restrict access to, capital. Further, while some countries have progressed in distributing COVID-19 vaccines to the general
population, many countries have limited to no access to vaccines at this time. To the extent the global supply of vaccine remains limited
or vaccination rates do not significantly increase, government restrictions in the countries with limited to no access or low vaccination
rates may persist or increase and economic activity may remain at depressed levels in those countries or regions.




                                                                     25
      Despite the relaxation of pandemic-related constraints in certain markets, considerable uncertainty still surrounds the COVID-19
pandemic, its potential effects, and the extent and effectiveness of government responses to the pandemic. If the pandemic is not
contained, or if new variants emerge or effective vaccines are not made available and utilized quickly enough, the adverse impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic could worsen, impacting all segments of the global economy, and result in a significant recession or worse.
However, the unprecedented and sweeping nature of the COVID-19 pandemic makes it extremely difficult to predict how our business
and operations will be affected in the long run. Further, the resumption of normal business operations after the disruptions caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic may be delayed or constrained by the pandemic’s lingering effects on our Members, consumers, and third-
party contract manufacturers and suppliers. Accordingly, our ability to conduct our business in the manner previously done or planned
for the future could be materially and adversely affected, and any of the foregoing risks, or other cascading effects of the COVID-19
pandemic, or any other pandemic that may emerge in the future, that are not currently foreseeable, could materially and adversely affect
our business, financial condition, and operating results. See the COVID-19 Pandemic and Sales by Geographic Region sections in Part II,
Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of this Annual Report on Form 10-
K for further discussion of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operating results.

   We depend on the integrity and reliability of our information technology infrastructure, and any related interruptions or
   inadequacies may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      Our business, including our ability to provide products and services to and manage our Members, depends on the performance
and availability of our information technology infrastructure, including our core transactional systems. The most important aspect of
our information technology infrastructure is the system through which we record and track Member sales, Volume Points, royalty
overrides, bonuses, and other incentives. The failure of our information systems to operate effectively, or a breach in security of these
systems, could adversely impact the promptness and accuracy of our product distribution and transaction processing. While we continue
to invest in our information technology infrastructure, there can be no assurance that there will not be any significant interruptions to
such systems, that the systems will be adequate to meet all of our business needs, or that the systems will keep pace with continuing
changes in technology, legal and regulatory standards. Further, as discussed in Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, we recently commenced a Digital Technology Program to develop a new enhanced
platform to provide enhanced digital capabilities and experiences to our Members.
       Our information technology infrastructure, as well as that of our Members and the other third parties with which we interact, may
be damaged, disrupted, or breached or otherwise fail for a number of reasons, including power outages, computer and telecommunication
failures, internal design, manual or usage errors, workplace violence or wrongdoing, or catastrophic events such as natural disasters,
severe weather conditions, or acts of war or terrorism. In addition, numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats, including advanced
and persistent cyberattacks, such as unauthorized attempts to access, disable, improperly modify, exfiltrate, or degrade our information
technology infrastructure, or the introduction of computer viruses, malware, “phishing” emails, and other destructive software, and
social engineering schemes, could compromise the confidentiality, availability, and integrity of our information technology
infrastructure as well as those of the third parties with which we interact. These attacks may come from external sources, such as
governments or hackers, or may originate internally from an employee or a third party with which we interact. We have been the target
of, and may be the target of in the future, malicious cyberattacks, although to date none of these attacks have had a meaningful adverse
impact on our business, financial condition, or operating results. The potential risk of cyberattacks may increase as we introduce new
technology systems and services. Additionally, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many of our employees have been encouraged
to work remotely, which may increase our exposure to significant systems interruptions, cybersecurity attacks, and otherwise
compromise the integrity and reliability of our information technology infrastructure and our internal controls.
       Any disruptions to, or failures or inadequacies of, our information technology infrastructure that we may encounter in the future
may result in substantial interruptions to our operations, expose us to significant liability, and may damage our reputation and our
relationships with, or cause us to lose, our Members, especially if the disruptions, failures, or inadequacies impair our ability to track
sales and pay royalty overrides, bonuses, and other incentives, any of which would harm our business, financial condition, and operating
results. Any such disruptions, failures, or inadequacies could also create compliance risks under the Consent Order and result in penalties,
fines, or sanctions under any applicable laws or regulations. Furthermore, it may be expensive or difficult to correct or replace any aspect
of our information technology infrastructure in a timely manner, if at all, and we may have little or no control over whether any
malfunctioning information technology services supplied to us by third parties are appropriately corrected, if at all. We have encountered,
and may encounter in the future, errors in our software and our enterprise network, and inadequacies in the software and services supplied
by certain of our vendors, although to date none of these errors or inadequacies have had a meaningful adverse impact on our business,
financial condition or operating results.
       In addition, developments in technology are continuing to evolve and affecting all aspects of our business, including how we
effectively manage our operations, interact with our Members and their customers, and commercialize opportunities that accompany the
evolving digital and data driven economy. Therefore, one of our top priorities is to modernize our technology and data infrastructure by,
among other things, creating more relevant and more personalized experiences wherever our systems interact with Members and their
customers; and developing ways to create more powerful digital tools and capabilities for Members to enable them to grow their


                                                                    26
businesses. These initiatives to modernize our technology and data infrastructure are expected to be implemented over the course of
many years and to require significant investments. If these initiatives are not successful, our ability to attract and retain Members and
their customers, increase sales, and reduce costs may be negatively affected. Further, these initiatives may be subject to cost overruns
and delays and may cause disruptions in our operations. These cost overruns and delays and disruptions could adversely impact our
business, financial condition, and operating results.

   Disruption of supply, shortage, or increases in the cost of ingredients, packaging materials, and other raw materials as well as
   climate change could materially harm our business, financial condition, and operating results.
      We and our third-party contract manufacturers depend on third-party suppliers to supply us with the various ingredients, packaging
materials, and other raw materials that we use in the manufacturing and distribution of our products. Our business could be materially
harmed if we experience operational difficulties with our third-party suppliers, such as increases in costs, reductions in the availability
of materials or production capacity, errors in complying with specifications or applicable law, insufficient quality control, and failures
to meet production or shipment deadlines. If we fail to develop or maintain our relationships with our third-party suppliers or if such
suppliers cease doing business with us or go out of business, we could face difficulties in finding or transitioning to alternative suppliers
that meet our standards.

       Many of the ingredients, packaging materials, and other raw materials we use are subject to fluctuations in availability and price
due to a number of factors beyond our control, including crop size, ingredient, water, and land scarcity, market demand for raw materials,
commodity market speculation, energy costs, currency fluctuations, supplier and logistics service capacities, import and export
requirements, tariffs, and other government policies, and drought, excessive rain, temperature extremes, and other severe weather events.
If we experience supply shortages, price increases, or supplier or regulatory impediments with respect to any of the materials we use in
our products or packaging, we may need to seek alternative supplies or suppliers and may experience difficulties in finding replacements
that are comparable in quality and price. For a discussion of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our supply chain see “If any of
our manufacturing facilities or third-party manufacturers fail to reliably supply products to us at required levels of quality or fail to
comply with applicable laws, our financial condition and operating results could be materially and adversely impacted” below.

      Further, the risks related to our ability to adequately source the materials required to meet our needs may be exacerbated by the
effects of climate change and the legal, regulatory, or market measures that may be implemented to address climate change. There is
growing concern that carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere may have an adverse impact on global temperatures,
weather patterns, and the frequency and severity of extreme weather and natural disasters. If climate change has a negative effect on
agricultural productivity, we may be subject to decreased availability or less favorable pricing for certain raw materials that are necessary
for our products, such as soybeans, wheat, tea leaves, and nuts. Severe weather conditions and natural disasters can reduce crop size and
crop quality, which in turn could reduce our supplies of raw materials, lower recoveries of usable raw materials, increase the prices of
our raw materials, increase our cost of storing and transporting our raw materials, or disrupt production schedules. The impacts of
climate change may also cause unpredictable water availability or exacerbate water scarcity. In addition, the increasing concern over
climate change and related sustainability matters may also result in more federal, state, local, and foreign legal and regulatory
requirements relating to climate change, which may significantly increase our costs of operation and delivery.




                                                                     27