RECITALS
 A. On January 31, 2012, a federal multidistrict litigation was
 established in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, In re: National Football League Players’ Concussion Injury Litigation, MDL No. 2323. Plaintiffs in MDL No. 2323 filed a Master Administrative Long-Form Complaint and a
 Master Administrative Class Action Complaint for Medical Monitoring on June 7, 2012. Plaintiffs filed an Amended Master Administrative Long-Form Complaint on July 17, 2012. Additional similar lawsuits are pending in various state and federal courts.
 

 B. The lawsuits arise from the alleged effects of mild traumatic brain
 injury allegedly caused by the concussive and sub-concussive impacts experienced by former NFL Football players. Plaintiffs seek to hold the NFL Parties responsible for their alleged injuries under various theories of liability, including that the NFL Parties allegedly breached a duty to NFL Football players to warn and protect them from the long-term health problems associated with concussions and that the NFL Parties allegedly concealed and misrepresented the connection between concussions and long term chronic brain injury.
 

 C. On August 30, 2012, the NFL Parties filed motions to dismiss the
 Master Administrative Class Action Complaint for Medical Monitoring and the Amended Master Administrative Long-Form Complaint on preemption grounds. Plaintiffs filed their oppositions to the motions on October 31, 2012, the NFL Parties filed reply
 memoranda of law on December 17, 2012, and plaintiffs filed sur reply memoranda of law on January 28, 2013. Oral argument on the NFL Parties’ motions to dismiss on preemption grounds was held on April 9, 2013.
 

 D. On July 8, 2013, prior to ruling on the motions to dismiss, the
 Court ordered the plaintiffs and NFL Parties to engage in mediation to determine if consensual resolution was possible and appointed retired United States District Court Judge Layn Phillips of Irell & Manella LLP as mediator.
 

 E. Over the course of the following two months, the Parties, by and
 through their respective counsel, engaged in settlement negotiations under the direction of Judge Phillips. On August 29, 2013, the Parties signed a settlement term sheet setting
 forth the material terms of a settlement agreement. On the same day, the Court issued an order deferring a ruling on the NFL Parties’ motions to dismiss and ordering the Parties to submit, as soon as possible, the full documentation relating to the settlement, along
 with a motion seeking preliminary approval of the settlement and notice plan. On December 16, 2013, the Court appointed a special master, Perry Golkin (“Special Master Golkin”), to assist the Court in evaluating the financial aspects of the proposed
 settlement.
 

 F. On January 6, 2014, Class Counsel moved the Court for an order,
 among other things, granting preliminary approval of the proposed settlement and conditionally certifying a settlement class and subclasses. On January 14, 2014, the Court denied that motion without prejudice.
 

 G. In conjunction with the January 2014 filing of the proposed
 settlement agreement, and this Settlement Agreement, the Class and Subclass Representatives filed Plaintiffs’ Class Action Complaint (“Class Action Complaint”) on January 6, 2014. In the Class Action Complaint, the Class and Subclass Representatives
 allege claims for equitable, injunctive and declaratory relief pursuant to Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 23(a)(1-4) & (b)(2), or, alternatively, for compensatory damages pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23(b)(3), for negligence, negligent hiring,
 negligent retention, negligent misrepresentation, fraud, fraudulent concealment, medical monitoring, wrongful death and survival, and loss of consortium, all under state law.
 

 H. The NFL Parties deny the Class and Subclass Representatives’
 allegations, and the allegations in Related Lawsuits, and deny any liability to the Class and Subclass Representatives, the Settlement Class, or any Settlement Class Member for any claims, causes of action, costs, expenses, attorneys’ fees, or damages of any kind, and would assert a number of substantial legal and factual defenses against plaintiffs’ claims if they were litigated to conclusion.
 

 I. The Class and Subclass Representatives, through their counsel,
 have engaged in substantial fact gathering to evaluate the merits of their claims and the NFL Parties’ defenses. In addition, the Class and Subclass Representatives have analyzed the legal issues raised by their claims and the NFL Parties’ defenses, including, without limitation, the NFL Parties’ motions to dismiss the Amended Master
 Administrative Long-Form Complaint and Master Administrative Class Action Complaint on preemption grounds.
 

 J. After careful consideration, the Class and Subclass
 Representatives, and their respective Counsel, have concluded that it is in the best interests of the Class and Subclass Representatives and the Settlement Class and Subclasses to compromise and settle all Released Claims against the Released Parties for consideration reflected in the terms and benefits of this Settlement Agreement. After arm’s length negotiations with Counsel for the NFL Parties, including through the efforts of the court-appointed mediator and Special Master Golkin, the Class and Subclass Representatives have considered, among other things: (1) the complexity, expense, and
 likely duration of the litigation; (2) the stage of the litigation and amount of fact gathering completed; (3) the potential for the NFL Parties to prevail on threshold issues and on the merits; and (4) the range of possible recovery, and have determined that this Settlement Agreement is fair, reasonable, adequate, and in the best interests of the Class and Subclass Representatives and the Settlement Class and Subclasses.
 

 K. The NFL Parties have concluded, in light of the costs, risks, and
 burden of litigation, that this Settlement Agreement in this complex putative class action litigation is appropriate. The NFL Parties and Counsel for the NFL Parties agree with the Class and Subclass Representatives and their respective counsel that this Settlement
 Agreement is a fair, reasonable, and adequate resolution of the Released Claims. The NFL Parties reached this conclusion after considering the factual and legal issues relating to the litigation, the substantial benefits of this Settlement Agreement, the expense that
 would be necessary to defend claims by Settlement Class Members through trial and any appeals that might be taken, the benefits of disposing of protracted and complex litigation, and the desire of the NFL Parties to conduct their business unhampered by the costs, distraction and risks of continued litigation over Released Claims.
 

 L. The Parties desire to settle, compromise, and resolve fully all
 Released Claims.
 

 M. The Parties desire and intend to seek Court review and approval of the Settlement Agreement, and, upon preliminary approval by the Court, the Parties intend to seek a Final Order and Judgment from the Court dismissing with prejudice the Class Action Complaint and ordering the dismissal with prejudice of Related Lawsuits.
 

 N. This Settlement Agreement will not be construed as evidence of, or as an admission by, the NFL Parties of any liability or wrongdoing whatsoever or as an admission by the Class or Subclass Representatives, or Settlement Class Members, of any lack of merit in their claims.