CELL STRUCTURE
Cells are the building blocks of life. A cell is chemical system that is able to maintain its structure
and reproduce. Cells are the fundamental unit of life. All living things are cells or composed of
cells. Although different living things may be as unlike as a violet and an octopus, they are all built
in essentially the same way. The most basic similarity is that all living things are composed of one
or more cells. This is known as the Cell Theory.
Our knowledge of cells is built on work done with microscopes. English scientist Robert
Hooke in 1665 first described cells from his observations of cork slices. Hooke first used the word
"cell". Dutch amateur scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek discovered microscopic animals in
water. German scientists Schleiden and Schwann in 1830's were first to say that all organisms are
made of one or more cells. German biologist Virchow in 1858 stated that all cells come from the
division of pre-existing cells.
The Cell Theory can be summarized as:
Cells are the fundamental unit of life - nothing less than a cell is alive.
All organisms are constructed of and by cells.
All cells arise from preexisting cells. Cells contain the information necessary for their own
reproduction. No new cells are originating spontaneously on earth today.
Cells are the functional units of life. All biochemical processes are carried out by cells. •
Groups of cells can be organized and function as multicellular organisms
Cells of multicellular organisms can become specialized in form and function to carry out
subprocesses of the multicellular organism.
Cells are common to all living beings, and provide information about all forms of life. Because
all cells come from existing cells, scientists can study cells to learn about growth, reproduction,
and all other functions that living things perform. By learning about cells and how they function,
we can learn about all types of living things.
Classification of cells:
All living organisms (bacteria, blue green algae, plants and animals) have cellular organization
and may contain one or many cells. The organisms with only one cell in their body are called
unicellular organisms (bacteria, blue green algae, some algae, Protozoa, etc.). The organisms
having many cells in their body are called multicellular organisms (fungi, most plants and
animals). Any living organism may contain only one type of cell either
A. Prokaryotic cells; B. Eukaryotic cells.
The terms prokaryotic and eukaryotic were suggested by Hans Ris in the 1960’s. This
classification is based on their complexity. Further based on the kingdom into which they may fall
i.e the plant or the animal kingdom, plant and animal cells bear many differences. These will be
studied in detail in the upcoming sections
PROKARYOTIC CELLS
Prokaryote comes from the Greek words for pre-nucleus. Prokaryotes:
i. One circular chromosome, not contained in a membrane.
ii. No histones or introns are present in Bacteria; both are found in Eukaryotes and Archaea.
iii. No membrane-bound organelles. (Only contain non membrane-bound organelles).
iv. Bacteria contain peptidoglycan in cell walls; Eukaryotes and Archaea do not.
v. Binary fission.
2
Size, Shape, and Arrangement of Bacterial Cells.
i. Average size of prokaryotic cells: 0.2 -2.0 μm in diameter 1-10 μm (0.001 – 0.01 mm) [book
says 2 – 8 μm] in length.
1. Typical eukaryote 10-500 μm in length (0.01 – 0.5 mm).
2. Typical virus 20-1000 nm in length (0.00000002 – 0.000001 m).
3. Thiomargarita is the largest bacterium known. It is about the size of a typed period (0.75
mm).
4. Nanoarchaeum is the smallest cell known. It is at the lower theoretical limit for cell size
(0.4 μm).
ii. Basic bacterial shapes:
1. Coccus (sphere/round).
2. Bacillus (staff/rod-shaped).
3. Spirilla (rigid with a spiral/corkscrew shape).
a. Flagella propel these bacteria.
4. Vibrio (curved rod).
5. Spirochetes (flexible with a spiral shape).
Axial filaments (endoflagella) propel these bacteria.
iii. Descriptive prefixes:
1. Diplo (two cells).
2. Tetra (four cells).
3. Sarcinae (cube of 8 cells).
4. Staphylo (clusters of cells).
5. Strepto (chains of cells).
iv. Unusual bacterial shapes:
1. Star-shaped Stella.
2. Square/rectangular Haloarcula.
v. Arrangements:
1. Pairs: diplococci, diplobacilli
2. Clusters: staphylococci
3. Chains: streptococci, streptobacilli.
vi. Most bacteria are monomorphic. They do not change shape unless environmental conditions
change.
vii. A few are pleomorphic. These species have individuals that can come in a variety of shapes


Structures External to the Prokaryotic Cell Wall.
a. Glycocalyx (sugar coat).
i. Usually very sticky.
ii. Found external to cell wall.
iii. Composed of polysaccharide and/or polypeptide.
iv. It can be broken down and used as an energy source when resources are scarce.
v. It can protect against dehydration.
vi. It helps keep nutrients from moving out of the cell.
1. A capsule is a glycocalyx that is neatly organized and is firmly attached to the
cell wall. a. Capsules prevent phagocytosis by the host’s immune system.
2. A slime layer is a glycocalyx that is unorganized and is loosely attached to the
cell wall.
b. Extracellular
 polysaccharide (extracellular
 polymeric
 substance) is
 a
glycocalyx made of sugars and allows bacterial cells to attach to various surfaces.Prokaryotic
Flagella.
i. Long, semi-rigid, helical, cellular appendage used for locomotion.
ii. Made of chains of the protein flagellin.
1. Attached to a protein hook. iii. Anchored to the cell wall and cell membrane by
the basal body.
iv. Motile Cells.
1. Rotate flagella to run and tumble.
2. Move toward or away from stimuli (taxis).
a. Chemotaxis. b. Phototaxis.
c. Axial Filaments (Endoflagella).
i. In spirochetes:
1. Anchored at one end of a cell.
2. Covered by an outer sheath.
3. Rotation causes cell to move like a corkscrew through a cork.
d. Fimbriae.
i. Shorter, straighter, thinner than flagella.
ii. Not used for locomotion.
iii. Allow for the attachment of bacteria to surfaces.
iv. Can be found at the poles of the cell, or covering the cell’s entire surface.
v. There may be few or many fimbriae on a single bacterium.
e. Pili (sex pili).
i. Longer than fimbriae.
ii. Only one or two per cell.
iii. Are used to transfer DNA from one bacterial cell to another, and in twitching & gliding
motility.
IV. The Prokaryotic Cell Wall.
a. Chemically and structurally complex, semi-rigid, gives structure to and protects the cell.
b. Surrounds the underlying plasma membrane.
4
c. Prevents osmotic lysis.
d. Contributes to the ability to cause disease in some species, and is the site of action for
some antibiotics.
e. Made of peptidoglycan (in bacteria).
i. Polymer of a disaccharide. 1. N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) & N-acetylmuramic
acid (NAM). ii. Disaccharides linked by polypeptides to form lattice surrounding
the cell. Fig.
iii. Penicillin inhibits this lattice formation, and leads to cellular lysis.
f. Gram-positive cell walls. Fig.
i. Many layers of peptidoglycan, resulting in a thick, rigid structure.
ii. Teichoic acids.
1. May regulate movement of cations (+).
2. May be involved in cell growth, preventing extensive wall breakdown
and lysis.
3. Contribute to antigenic specificity for each Gram-positive bacterial
species.
4. Lipoteichoic acid links to plasma membrane.
5. Wall teichoic acid links to peptidoglycan.
g. Gram-negative cell walls.
i. Contains only one or a few layers of peptidoglycan.
1. Peptidoglycan is found in the periplasm, a fluid-filled space between the
outer membrane and plasma membrane.
a. Periplasm contains many digestive enzymes and transport
proteins.
ii. No teichoic acids are found in Gram-negative cell walls.
iii. More susceptible to rupture than Gram-positive cells.
iv. Outer membrane:
1. Composed of lipopolysaccharides, lipoproteins, and phospholipids.
2. Protects the cell from phagocytes, complement, antibiotics, lysozyme,
detergents, heavy metals, bile salts, and certain dyes.
3. Contains transport proteins called porins.
4. Lipopolysaccharide is composed of:
a. O polysaccharide (antigen) that can be used to ID certain Gram- negative
bacterial species.
b. Lipid A (endotoxin) can cause shock, fever, and even death if
enough is released into the host’s blood.
h. Gram Stain Mechanism.
i. Crystal Violet-Iodine (CV-I) crystals form within the cell.
ii. Gram-positive:
1. Alcohol dehydrates peptidoglycan.
2. CV-I crystals cannot leave.
iii. Gram-negative:
1. Alcohol dissolves outer membrane and leaves holes in peptidoglycan.
2. CV-I washes out. 3. Safranin stains the cell pink.
iv. Table 1, pg. 94, compares Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
i. Damage to Prokaryotic Cell Walls.
i. Because prokaryotic cell walls contain substances not normally found in animal
5
cells, drugs or chemicals that disrupt prokaryotic cell wall structures are often used
in medicine, or by the host to combat the bacteria.
1. Lysozyme digests the disaccharides in peptidoglycan.
2. Penicillin inhibits the formation of peptide bridges in peptidoglycan.
ii. A protoplast is a Gram-positive cell whose cell wall has been destroyed, but that
is still alive and functional. (Lost its peptidoglycan).
iii. A spheroplast is a wall-less Gram-negative cell. (Lost its outer membrane and
peptidoglycan).
iv. L forms are wall-less cells that swell into irregular shapes. They can live, divide,
and may return to a walled state.
v. Protoplasts and spheroplasts are susceptible to osmotic lysis.
vi. Gram-negative bacteria are not as susceptible to penicillin due to the outer
membrane and the small amount of peptidoglycan in their walls.
vii. Gram-negative bacteria are susceptible to antibiotics that can penetrate the
outer membrane (Streptomycin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline).
V. Structures Internal to the Cell Wall.
a. Plasma Membrane (Inner Membrane).
a. Phospholipid bilayer lying inside the cell wall.
1. The phospholipid bilayer is the basic framework of the plasma membrane.
2. The bilayer arrangement occurs because the phospholipids are amphipathic molecules.
They have both polar (charged) and nonpolar
 (uncharged) parts with the polar
“head” of the phospholipid pointing out and the nonpolar “tails” pointing toward the center
of the membrane, forming a nonpolar, hydrophobic region in the membrane’s interior.
b. Much of the metabolic machinery is located on the plasma membrane.
Photosynthesis, aerobic cellular respiration, and anaerobic cellular respiration
reactions occur here. This means that there is a surface area to volume ratio at
which bacteria reach a critical size threshold, beyond which bacteria can’t survive.
i. Thiomargarita (0.75 mm) is the largest known bacterium and is larger
than most eukaryotic cells. It has many invaginations of the plasma
membrane, which increases it surface area relative to its volume.
c. Peripheral proteins.
i. Enzymes.
ii. Structural proteins.
iii. Some assist the cell in changing membrane shape.
d. Integral proteins and transmembrane proteins.
i. Provide channels for movement of materials into and out of the cell.
e. Fluid Mosaic Model.
i. Membrane is as viscous as olive oil.
ii. Proteins move to function.
iii. Phospholipids rotate and move laterally.
f. Selective permeability allows the passage of some molecules but not others
across the plasma membrane.
i. Large molecules cannot pass through.
ii. Ions pass through very slowly or not at all.
iii. Lipid soluble molecules pass through easily.
iv.Smaller molecules (water, oxygen, carbon dioxide, some simple sugars)
6
usually pass through easily.
g. The plasma membrane contains enzymes for ATP production.
h. Photosynthetic pigments are found on in-foldings of the plasma membrane
called chromatophores or thylakoids. Fig. 15.
i. Damage to the plasma membrane by alcohols, quaternary ammonium
compounds (a class of disinfectants) and polymyxin antibiotics causes leakage of
cell contents.
j. Movement of Materials Across Membranes.
1. Passive Processes:
a. Simple diffusion: Movement of a solute from an area of high concentration to an area of
low concentration (down its concentration gradient) until equilibrium is reached.
b. Facilitated diffusion: Solute combines with a transport protein in the membrane, to pass
from one side of the membrane to the other. The molecule is still moving down its
concentration gradient. The transport proteins are specific.
c. Osmosis.
i. Movement of water across a selectively permeable membrane from an area of
higher water concentration to an area of lower water concentration.
ii. Osmotic pressure.
The pressure needed to stop the movement of water across the membrane.
iii. Isotonic, hypotonic, and hypertonic solutions.
2. Active Processes:
a. Active transport of substances requires a transporter protein and ATP. The solute
molecule is pumped against its concentration gradient. Transport proteins are specific. i. In
group translocation (a special form of active transport found only in prokaryotes)
movement of a substance requires a specific transport protein. 1. The substance is
chemically altered during transport, preventing it from escaping the cell after it is
transported inside. 2. This process requires high-energy phosphate compounds like
phosphoenolpyruvic acid (PEP) to phosphorylate the transported molecule, preventing its
movement out of the cell.
b. Cytoplasm.
i. Cytoplasm is the substance inside the plasma membrane.
ii. It is about 80% water.
iii. Contains proteins, enzymes, carbohydrates, lipids, inorganic ions, various compounds,
a nuclear area, ribosomes, and inclusions.
c. Nuclear Area (Nucleoid).
i. Contains a single circular chromosome made of DNA.
1. No histones or introns in bacteria.
2. The chromosome is attached to the plasma membrane at a point along its length,
where proteins synthesize and partition new DNA for division during binary fission.
ii. Is not surrounded by a nuclear envelope the way eukaryotic chromosomes are.
iii. Also contains small circular DNA molecules called plasmids.
1. Plasmids can be gained or lost without harming the cell.
2. Usually contain less than 100 genes.
3. Can be beneficial if they contain genes for antibiotic resistance, tolerance to
toxic metals, production of toxins, or synthesis of enzymes.
4. They can be transferred from one bacterium to another.
7
5. Plasmids are used in genetic engineering.
d. Ribosomes.
i. Site of protein synthesis.
ii. Composed of a large and small subunit, both made of protein and rRNA. iii. Prokaryotic
ribosomes are 70S ribosomes.
1. Made of a small 30S subunit and a larger 50S subunit.
iv. Eukaryotic ribosomes are 80S ribosomes.
1. Made of a small 40S subunit and a larger 60S subunit.
v. Certain antibiotics target only prokaryotic ribosomal subunits without targeting
eukaryotic ribosomal subunits.
e. Inclusions.
i. Reserve deposits of nutrients that can be used in times of low resource availability. ii.
Include:
1. Metachromatic granules (volutin). Reserve of inorganic phosphate for ATP.
2. Polysaccharide granules. Glycogen and starch.
3. Lipid inclusions.
4. Sulfur granules. Energy reserve for “sulfur bacteria” that derive energy by
oxidizing sulfur and sulfur compounds.
5. Carboxysomes. Contain an enzyme necessary for bacteria that use carbon
dioxide as their only source of carbon for carbon dioxide fixation.
6. Gas vacuoles. Help bacteria maintain buoyancy.
7. Magnetosomes. Made of iron oxide, they serve as ballast to help some bacteria
sink until reaching an appropriate attachment site. They also decompose hydrogen peroxide.
f. Endospores.
i. Resting Gram-positive bacterial cells that form when essential nutrients can no longer
be obtained.
ii. Resistant to desiccation, heat, chemicals, radiation.
iii. Bacillus anthracis (anthrax), Clostridium spp. (gangrene, tetanus, botulism, food
poisoning).
iv. Sporulation (sporogenesis): the process of endospore formation within the vegetative
(functional) cell. This takes several hours.
1. Spore septum (invagination of plasma membrane) begins to isolate the newly
replicated DNA and a small portion of cytoplasm. This results in the formation of
two separate membrane bound structures.
2. The plasma membrane starts to surround the DNA, cytoplasm, and the new
membrane encircling the material isolated in step 1, forming a double-layered
membrane-bound structure called a forespore.
3. Thick peptidoglycan layers are laid down between the two membranes of the
forespore.
4. Then a thick spore coat of protein forms around the outer membrane of the
forespore, which is responsible for the durability of the endospore.
5. When the endospore matures, the vegetative cell wall ruptures, killing the cell,
and freeing the endospore.
a. The endospore is metabolically inert, and contains the chromosome,
8
some RNA, ribosomes, enzymes, other molecules, and very little water.
b. Endospores can remain dormant for millions of years.
v. Germination: the return to the vegetative state.
1. Triggered by damage to the endospore coat. The enzymes activate, breaking
down the protective layers. Water then can enter, and metabolism resumes.
vi. Endospores can survive conditions that vegetative cells cannot: boiling, freezing,
desiccation, chemical exposure, radiation, etc.

EUKARYOTES:
a. Make up algae, protozoa, fungi, higher plants, and animals.
Flagella and Cilia. Rotate Cilia are numerous, short, hair-like projections extending from the surface of a
cell. They function to move materials across the surface of the cell, or move the cell around in its
environment.
i. Flagella are similar to cilia but are much longer, usually moving an entire cell. The only
example of a flagellum in the human body is the sperm cell tail.
1. Eukaryotic flagella move in a whip-like manner, while prokaryotic flagella
9
b. Cell Wall.
i. Simple compared to prokaryotes.
1. No peptidoglycan in eukaryotes.
a. Antibiotics that target peptidoglycan (penicillins and cephalosporins) do
not harm us.
ii. Cell walls are found in plants, algae, and fungi.
iii. Made of carbohydrates.
1. Cellulose in algae, plants, and some fungi.
2. Chitin in most fungi. 3. Glucan and mannan in yeasts (unicellular fungi).
c. Glycocalyx.
i. Sticky carbohydrates extending from an animal cell’s plasma membrane.
ii. Glycoproteins and glycolipids form a sugary coat around the cell—the glycocalyx—
which helps cells recognize one another, adhere to one another in some tissues, and protects
the cell
 from digestion by enzymes in the extracellular fluid.
1. The glycocalyx also attracts a film of fluid to the surface of many cells, such as
RBC’s, making them slippery so they can pass through narrow vessels.
d. Plasma Membrane.
i. The plasma membrane is a flexible, sturdy barrier that surrounds and contains the
cytoplasm of the cell.
1. The fluid mosaic model describes its structure.
2. The membrane consists of proteins in a sea of phospholipids.
a. Some proteins float freely while others are anchored at specific
locations.
b. The membrane lipids allow passage of several types of lipid-soluble
molecules but act as a barrier to the passage of charged or polar substances.
c. Channel and transport proteins allow movement of polar molecules and
ions across the membrane.
ii. Phospholipid bilayer.
1. Has the same basic arrangement as the prokaryotic plasma membrane.
iii. Arrangement of Membrane Proteins.
1. The membrane proteins are divided into integral and peripheral proteins.
a. Integral proteins extend into or across the entire lipid bilayer among the fatty acid tails
of the phospholipid molecules, and are firmly anchored in place.
i. Most are transmembrane proteins, which span the entire lipid bilayer and protrude into
both the cytosol and extracellular fluid.
b. Peripheral proteins associate loosely with the polar heads of membrane lipids,
and are found at the inner or outer surface of the membrane.
10
2. Many membrane proteins are glycoproteins (proteins with carbohydrate groups
attached to the ends that protrude into the extracellular fluid).
iv. Functions of Membrane Proteins.
1. Membrane proteins vary in different cells and function as:
a. Ion channels (pores): Allow ions such as sodium or potassium to cross the cell
membrane; (they can't diffuse through the bilayer). Most are selective—they allow only a
single type of ion to pass. Some ion channels open and close.
b. Transporters: selectively move a polar substance from one side of the membrane to
the other.
c. Receptors: recognize and bind a specific molecule. The chemical binding to the receptor
is called a ligand.
d. Enzymes: catalyze specific chemical reactions at the inside or outside surface of the
cell.
e. Cell-identity markers (often glycoproteins and glycolipids), such as human leukocyte
antigens.
f. Linkers: anchor proteins in the plasma membrane of neighboring cells to each other or
to protein filaments inside and outside the cell.
2. The different proteins help to determine many of the functions of the plasma membrane.
v. Selective permeability of the plasma membrane allows passage of some molecules.
1. Transport mechanisms:
a. Simple diffusion. b. Facilitated diffusion. c. Osmosis. d. Active transport. (No
group translocation in Eukaryotes). e. Vesicular Transport.
i. A vesicle is a small membranous sac formed by budding off from an existing membrane.
ii. Two types of vesicular transport are endocytosis and exocytosis.
1. Endocytosis.
a. In endocytosis, materials move into a cell in a vesicle formed from the plasma
membrane.
b. Viruses can take advantage of this mechanism to enter cells.
c. Phagocytosis is the ingestion of solid particles, such as worn out cells, bacteria, or viruses.
Pseudopods extend and engulf particles.
d. Pinocytosis is the ingestion of extracellular fluid. The membrane folds inward bringing in fluid
and dissolved substances.
2. In exocytosis, membrane-enclosed structures called secretory
vesicles that form inside the cell fuse with the plasma membrane and release their contents into
the extracellular fluid.
f. Cytoplasm.
i. Substance inside the plasma membrane and outside nucleus.
ii. Cytosol is the fluid portion of cytoplasm.
iii. Cytoskeleton.
1. The cytoskeleton is a network of several kinds of protein filaments that extend
throughout the cytoplasm, and provides a structural framework for the cell.
2. It consists of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules.
11
a. Most microfilaments (the smallest cytoskeletal elements) are composed
of actin and function in movement (muscle contraction and cell division) and mechanical support
for the cell itself and for microvilli.
b. Intermediate filaments are composed of several different proteins and
function in support and to help anchor organelles such as the nucleus.
c. Microtubules (the largest cytoskeletal elements) are composed of a
protein called tubulin and help
 determine cell shape; they function in the intracellular
transport of organelles and the migration of chromosome during cell division. They also
function in the movement of cilia and flagella.
iv. Cytoplasmic streaming.
1. Movement of cytoplasm and nutrients throughout cells.
2. Moves the cell over surfaces.
g. Organelles.
i. Organelles are specialized structures that have characteristic shapes and perform
specific functions in eukaryotic cellular growth, maintenance, reproduction.
2.1.RIBOSOMES.
Nucleus.
The nucleus is usually the most prominent feature of a eukaryotic cell.
b. Most have a single nucleus; some cells (human red blood cells) have none, whereas
others (human skeletal muscle fibers) have several in each cell.
c. The parts of the nucleus include the:
i. Nuclear envelope (a double membrane), which is perforated by channels called nuclear
pores, that control the movement of substances between the nucleus and the cytoplasm.
1. Small molecules and ions diffuse passively, while movement of most large molecules
out of the nucleus involves active transport.
ii. Nucleoli function in producing ribosomes. d. Genetic material (DNA). Within the
nucleus are the cell’s hereditary units, called genes, which are arranged in single file along
chromosomes. Each chromosome is a long molecule of DNA that is coiled together with
several proteins (including histones).
a. Sites of protein synthesis.
b. 80S in eukaryotes.
i. Membrane-bound ribosomes found on rough ER.
ii. Free ribosomes found in cytoplasm.
c. 70S in prokaryotes.
i. Also found in chloroplasts and mitochondria.
3. Endoplasmic Reticulum.
a. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a network of membranes extending from the nuclear
membrane that form flattened sacs or tubules.
b. Rough ER is continuous with the nuclear membrane and has its outer surface studded
with ribosomes, which synthesize proteins. The proteins then enter the space inside the ER
for processing (into glycoproteins or for attachment to phospholipids) and sorting,
12
and are then either incorporated into organelle membranes, inserted into the plasma
membrane, or secreted via exocytosis.
c. Smooth ER extends from the rough ER to form a network of membrane tubules, but it
does not contain ribosomes on its membrane surface. In humans, it synthesizes fatty acids
and steroids, detoxifies drugs, removes phosphate from glucose 6-phosphate (allowing free
glucose to enter the blood), and stores and releases calcium ions involved in muscle
contraction.
4. Golgi Complex.
The Golgi complex consists of four to six stacked, flattened membranous sacs (cisterns).
The cis (entry) face faces the rough ER, and trans (exit) face faces the cell’s plasma
membrane. Between the cis and trans faces are the medial cisternae.
b. The cis, medial, and trans cisternae each contain different enzymes that permit each to
modify, sort, and package proteins received from the rough ER for transport to different
destinations (such as the plasma membrane, to other organelles, or for export out of the
cell).
5. Lysosomes.
a. Lysosomes are membrane-enclosed vesicles that form from the Golgi complex and
contain powerful digestive enzymes.
b. Lysosomes function in digestion of substances that enter the cell by endocytosis, and
transport the final products of digestion into the cytosol.
c. They digest worn-out organelles (autophagy).
d. They digest their own cellular contents (autolysis).
e. They carry out extracellular digestion (as happens when sperm release lysosomal
enzymes to aid in penetrating an oocyte).
6. Vacuoles.
a. Space in the cytoplasm enclosed by a membrane called a tonoplast.
b. Derived from the Golgi complex.
c. They serve in the following ways:
i. Temporary storage for biological molecules and ions.
ii. Bring food into cells.
iii. Provide structural support.
iv. Store metabolic wastes.
7. Peroxisomes.
a. Peroxisomes are similar in structure to lysosomes, but are smaller.
b. They contain enzymes (oxidases) that use molecular oxygen to oxidize (remove
hydrogen atoms from) various organic substances.
13
c. They take part in normal metabolic reactions such as the oxidation of amino and fatty
acids.
d. New peroxisomes form by budding off from preexisting ones.
e. They produce and then destroy H2O2 (hydrogen peroxide) in the process of their
metabolic activities.
8. Centrosomes.
a. Centrosomes are dense areas of cytoplasm containing the centrioles, which are paired
cylinders arranged at right angles to one another, and serve as centers for organizing
microtubules and the mitotic spindle during mitosis.
9. Mitochondria.
a. Found in nearly all eukaryotic cells.
b. A mitochondrion is bound by a double membrane, with a fluid-filled space between
called the intermembranous space. The outer membrane is smooth, while the inner
membrane is arranged in folds called cristae. The mitochondrial matrix is found inside the
inner mitochondrial membrane.
c. The folds of the cristae provide a large surface area for the chemical reactions that are
part of the aerobic phase of cellular respiration. These reactions produce most of a
eukaryotic cell’s ATP, and the enzymes that catalyze them are located on the cristae and
in the matrix.
d. Mitochondria self-replicate using their own DNA and contain 70S ribosomes. They
grow and reproduce on their own in a way that is similar to binary fission. Mitochondrial
DNA (genes) is inherited only from the mother, since sperm normally lack most organelles
such as mitochondria, ribosomes, ER, and the Golgi complex. Any sperm mitochondria
that do enter the oocyte are soon destroyed.
10. Chloroplasts.
a. Found only in algae and green plants.
b. Contain the pigment chlorophyll and enzymes necessary for photosynthesis.
c. Chloroplasts self-replicate using their own DNA and contain 70S ribosomes. They grow
and reproduce on their own in a way that is similar to binary fission.
VII. Endosymbiotic Theory.
a. Large bacterial cells lost their cell walls and engulfed smaller bacteria.
b. A symbiotic (mutualistic) relationship developed.
i. The host cell supplied the nutrients.
ii. The engulfed cell produced excess energy that the host could use.
iii. The relationship evolved.
c. Evidence:
14
i. Mitochondria and chloroplasts resemble bacteria in size and shape.
1. They divide on their own—independently of the host, and contain their own DNA
(single circular chromosome). This process is nearly identical to binary fission seen in
bacteria.
2. They contain 70S ribosomes.
3. Their method of protein synthesis is more like that of prokaryotes (no RNA processing).
4. Antibiotics that inhibit protein synthesis on ribosomes in bacteria also inhibit protein
Difference among eukaryotic cells
There are many different types of eukaryotic cells, though animals and plants are the most
familiar eukaryotes, and thus provide an excellent starting point for understanding
eukaryotic structure. Fungi and many protists have some substantial differences, however.
Animal cell
An animal cell is a form of eukaryotic cell that makes up many tissues in animals. Animal
cells are distinct from other eukaryotes, most notably plant cells, as they lack cell walls and
chloroplasts. They also have smaller vacuoles. Due to the lack of a cell wall, animal cells
can adopt a variety of shapes. A phagocytic cell can even engulf other structures.
There are many different types of cell. For instance, there are approximately 210 distinct
cell types in the adult human body.
Plant cell
Plant cells are quite different from the cells of the other eukaryotic organisms. Their
distinctive features are:
A large central vacuole (enclosed by a membrane, the tonoplast), which maintains the cell's
turgor and controls movement ofmolecules between the cytosol and sap
A primary cell wall containing cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin, deposited by the
protoplast on the outside of the cell membrane; this contrasts with the cell walls of fungi, which
contain chitin, and the cell envelopes of prokaryotes, in which peptidoglycans are the main
structural molecules
The plasmodesmata, linking pores in the cell wall that allow each plant cell to communicate
with other adjacent cells; this is different from the functionally analogous system of gap
junctions between animal cells.
15
Plastids, especially chloroplasts that contain chlorophyll, the pigment that gives
plants their green color and allows them to perform photosynthesis
Bryophytes and seedless vascular plants lack flagellae and centrioles except in the sperm
cells.[16] Sperm of cycads and Ginkgoare large, complex cells that swim with hundreds to
thousands of flagellae.
Conifers (Pinophyta)
 and flowering
 plants (Angiospermae)
 lack
the flagellae and centrioles that are present in animal cells.

