GOUT
A. GOALS
 1. Understand pathogenesis of gouty arthritis
 2. Learn pharmacologic treatment for gout
B. CASE
• 55-year-old man with history of episodic pain and swelling in the 1st MTP
joints
• Started allopurinol one week earlier
• Physical examination showed rock-hard lump on right pina and hot, tender
purplish-blue swelling in the knee and the left midfoot.
• Serum uric acid concentration 7.8 mg/dl
• Synovial fluid aspirate contained intracellular needle-shaped crystals with
strong negative birefringence
THE FOUR PHASES OF GOUT
1. Asymptomatic hyperuricemia
Serum urate is typically raised (>7 mg/dl for men and >6 mg/dl for women) for 20
years before the first attack of gouty arthritis or urolithiasis
2. Acute gouty arthritis

The first attach usually occurs between the 4th and 6th decades. Onset before the
age of 30 years raises the question of an unusual form of gout, perhaps related to
an enzymatic defect that causes purine overproduction.
Precipitating factors are antihyperuricemic therapy (probenecid, allopurinol),
diuretics, IV heparin, cyclosporine, trauma, surgery, alcohol (beer), chronic lead
poisoning, dietary excess, hemorrhage, foreign protein therapy, and infections.
Medical conditions associated with gout are obesity, diabetes mellitus,
hypertriglyceridemia, hypertension, atherosclerosis, syndrome X (resistance to
insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, hyperinsulinemia, hypertension, and
dyslipoproteinemia with high levels of plasma triglycerides and high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol).
Usually a single joint is affected, and the first metatarsophalangeal joint is the
most commonly affected site. The attack begins suddenly and is common at
night. Involvement is usually in the lower extremities. The involved joint
becomes dusky, red, and swollen. Pain is intense and “the night is passed in
torture”.
The pathogenesis of acute gouty arthritis is centered about the monosodium urate
crystal, which is always present. Of interest, hyperuricemia is often present but is
not necessary for the reaction to occur. Urate crystals, which were likely
deposited in synovium, are thought to “flake off” and initiate an intense
inflammatory response. The crystals become heavily coated with IgG and iron,
both of which increase their inflammatory potential. Leukocytes are necessary for
the reaction; almost all of the crystals in an affected joint have been ingested at
the height of the reaction. The release of lysosomal mediators and the release of
superoxide anion contribute to the local inflammation. Many serum factors
mediate the inflammatory response, including complement, fibronectin, IgG, and
a number of cytokines among which is transforming growth factor-beta.
Leukocytosis, fever, and high erythrocyte sedimentation rate may accompany the
acute attack. Radiographs are normal in the acute phase.
3. Intercritical gout.

Most patients will have a second attack 6 – 24 months after the first attack. The
period between attacks is known as the intercritical period. Joints appear normal
during this time.
4. Chronic tophaceous gout.
Eventually, patients may enter a phase of chronic polyarticular gout without painfree periods. This may occur 3-42 years after the first attack; the average period
is about 12 years. Tophi are a manifestation of the inability to eliminate urate as
rapidly as it is produced. Urate deposits appear in the cartilage, synovium,
tendons, and soft tissues. A favored location is extensor surfaces and pressure
points, and the lesions may resemble rheumatoid nodules. In untreated disease,
massive destruction of joints may occur. Tophi have been reported to resolve
over periods of years in patients who receive probenecid or allopurinol.
E. PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
1. Asymptomatic hyperuricemia
First, consider the multiple causes of secondary hyperuricemia: consider
drugs, renal insufficiency, myeloproliferative and lymphoproliferative
diseases, hemolytic anemia, anemias associate with ineffective
erythropoiesis, psoriasis, Paget’s disease of bone, and enzyme defects (see
below).
Treatment is not recommended for asymptomatic hyperuricemia.
Exceptions to this rule are enzyme defects that lead to lifelong
hyperuricemia. Exceptions to this rule are enzyme defects that lead to
lifelong hyperuricemia (examples: deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase in the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, partial
deficiency of HGPRT, superactivity of 5-phosphoribosyl – 1-
pyrophosphate) and the hyperuricemia associated with tumor
chemotherapy.
2. Acute gouty arthritis
Principles of treating acute gout include use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, colchicines, and corticosteroids. Do not attempt to
reduce plasma urate concentrations in the patient who is experiencing an
acute attack.
1. NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS
Treatment of acute gouty arthritis is based upon the judicious use of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS). Many of these
agents are effective. Maximum-dose NSAID treatment is started at the
first sign of an attack and the dose is lowed within a day or two and
continued until the arthritis has resolved. NSAIDS are also effective
in the well-established attack. Indocin (starting dose 50 mg po TID or
QID) is often employed; the dose is tapered to 0 after about 1 week.
Renal insufficiency is a contraindication to this therapy so is active
peptic ulcer disease. Consider a history of bleeding from the upper
gastrointestinal tract when deciding upon therapy for acute gout.
Undesirable side effects of traditional NSAIDS: Gastric/esophageal
irritation, exacerbations of peptic ulcers, anti-platelet effects,
reversible hepatocellular toxicity, decreased creatinine clearance, skin
rashes, aspirin-like reactions in the presence of the rhinitis, nasal
polyposis, and asthma syndrome, and headaches and confusion in the
elderly.
Aspirin increases renal retention of uric acid in low doses, whereas
high doses (3.5-5.0 gm/day) are uricosuric. It is avoided as an agent to
treat an acute attack of gout.
2. COLCHICINE
Colchicine can be used to treat acute gout, but should be limited to low
oral doses or cautious intravenous use (the latter for the hospitalized
patient only). Colchicine should be used in reduced doses or avoided
altogether in the patient with renal insufficiency.
Some clinicians will give a brief course of oral colchicines, 2-3 tablets
a week, in geriatric patients or patients with renal insufficiency.
No patient should receive the traditional high-dose treatment in which
numerous tablets of colchicines are given by mouth. This therapy can
cause very servere diarrhea and dehydration.
Intravenous administration should be given according to strict
guidelines: (1) Single IV doses should not exceed 1 to 2 mg and the
total cumulative dose should not be > 4mg, (2) No additional
colchicines should be prescribed for 7 days, (3) the dose of IV
colchicines should be halved in those with creatinine clearance < 50
ml/min and in those > 65 years of age in whom the creatinine
clearance is not known.
Patients with renal insufficiency, especially those who are on dialysis,
are at risk of developing colchicine neuromyopathy. This
complication is characterized by elevated CPK and muscle weakness.
Discontinuation of colchicine leads to improvement in the myopathy
over several w3eeks. Associated neuropathy resolves more slowly.
 3. CORTICOSTEROIDS

Intraarticular corticosteroids are very useful in breaking attacks of
acute gout and have special value when other treatments cannot be
utilized. In some instances, ACTH injections or oral corticosteroids
are required.
F. LONGTERM PROPHYLACTIC TREATMENT
a. PROPHLAXIS
Prophylaxis of the acute attack can be achieved by administering daily low
doses of colchicine (0.5 or 0.6 mg tablet by mouth, 1 or 2 times daily; or in the
presence of renal insufficiency, one tablet 3 times per week). An alternate
prophylactic drug is Indocin, 25 mg by mouth twice a day. ALWAYS USE
PROPHYLAXIS WHEN STARTING DRUGS TO LOWER THE
SERUM URIC ACID LEVEL.
b. URICOSURIG THERAPY
Uricosuric agents facilitate urate excretion by the kidney and increase urate
clearance and the fractional excretion of filtered urate. Probenecid is the most
commonly used drug in this class. It is started at a dose of 0.5 gm/.day, and
the dose is increased gradually to 1 – 3 gm/day, given in 2-3 divided doses.
Renal insufficiency and a history of nephrolithiasis are contraindications to
uricosuric treatment.

c. XANTHINE OXIDASE INHIBITION
The xanthine oxidase inhibitor, allopurinol, is used long-term to lower serum
uric acid. It is indicated in overproduction of urate (examples: 24 hour urine
uric acid >0.8 gm while on a normal diet; enzyme defect that leads to lifelong
overproduction such as deficiency of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase), Tophi, renal insufficiency, nephrolithiasis, or intolerance to
uricosuric agents.
Allopurinol can paradoxically initiate acute polyarticular gout. For this
reason, it should never be used in the patient who is experiencing acute gouty
arthritis. Remember to start prophylactic treatment and to continue it for at
least 6 weeks when allopurinol is started.
The dose of allopurinol should be adjusted according to the patient’s renal
function. The nomogram for maintenance allopurinol, adapted from Am J
Med 76:43, 1984, is:
 CCr 0, 100 mg every 3 days; CCr 10, 100 mg every 2 days;
 CCR 20, 100 mg/day; CCR 40, 150 mg/day; CCr 60, 200 mg/day
 CCr 80, 250 mg/day; CCr 100, 300 mg/day; CCr 120, 350 mg/day
 CCr 140, 400 mg/day
The risk in using allopurinol in renal insufficiency is the allopurinol
hypersensitivity syndrome. Use of diuretics is also a risk factor. The
syndrome develops within 2 – 4 weeks of starting allopurinol and mortality is
20%. It is characterized by skin rash, fever hepatocellular injury,
Leukocytosis, eosinophilia, and worsening renal function.
Also, be aware that allopurinol causes potentiation of azathioprine, which as a
purine analogue is metabolized by xanthine oxidase. The use of allopurinol
requires a 50 to 75% reduction in the azathioprine dose. Careful monitoring
of the leukocyte count is required; the margin between leucopenia and
inadequate immunosuppression is narrow.
II. PSEUDEOGOUT
Pseudogout refers to articular disease associated with calcium pyrophosphate
dehydrate crystals in synovial fluid or synovium. It is often associated with
chondrocalcinosis, a radiographic finding in which calcium-containing crystals
are visualized in fibrocartilage or articular cartilage. It is discussed here because
some clinical features resemble gout. Differentiation from grout is important; the
Pseudogout patient should not receive allopurinol.
Pseudogout can occur as a hereditary disease, as a sporadic disease, or as a
condition that is associated with metabolic diseases or trauma. The hereditary
disease usually shows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Pseudogout
is clearly associated with OLD AGE, and associations with hyperparathyroidism,
hemochromatosis, hypothyroidism, amyloidosis, hypomagnesemia, and
hypophosphatasia have been reported.
The manifestations of Pseudogout are:
1. Acute inflammation in one or more joints lasting for several days to 2
weeks. Joints commonly involved are: knees (50%), wrists, and
shoulders. As with gout, the attacks can occur spontaneously or be
provoked by trauma, surgery or severe illness.
2. About one half of these patients have progressive degeneration of
 numerous joints, and acute flares of arthritis may be superimposed on
 the degenerative problem.
3. About 50% of patients have pseudo-rheumatoid presentation with
 multiple joint involvement. Rheumatoid factor is present in 10% of
 these patients, leading to confusion with rheumatoid arthritis.
