Defining a successful business 
EVERY ENTREPRENEUR ASPIRES to create a successful 
business, and investors certainly want management to run successful 
businesses. So what determines whether a business is being successful? 
Before answering this question, it is helpful to define what a business 
is and the various forms it can take.
A business is a commercial operation that provides products or 
services with the aim of making a profit for the benefit of its owners. The 
significant point is “for the benefit of its owners”, which differentiates 
it from a government or not-for-profit organisation, such as a charity, 
where the activity is conducted for the benefit of the people it serves.
A profit is an essential element of running a successful business. It 
is a trading surplus whereby the revenues earned exceed the costs. This 
surplus belongs to the owners of the business to use as they choose: 
to take for themselves, to reinvest back in the business, or a mixture 
of the two. For a government organisation or charity, any surplus is 
reinvested in the activities to further benefit the people it serves.
Business structure 
A business can take many forms, ranging from a sole trader to a large 
multinational company. The principal aim of making a profit for its 
owners is still the same. 
A person starting out and setting up a business will take all the risk 
and reward as the venture gets under way. As the business grows it can 
be advantageous to share the risk with others and separate the business 
activities from those of the owner by establishing a company.
A company is a legal entity in its own right that is separate from its 
2017 Guide Financial Management.indd 1 22/01/2018 13:36
2 guide to financial management
owners. An investor is risking only the money paid for buying some 
shares in the company. If the company ceases trading, the shareholders 
(owners) are not liable to make up any shortfall between the value of 
the company’s assets and its liabilities.
There are five broad categories of business:
■ Sole trader. Someone who sets up a business alone and takes all 
the risk and reward of running it, and who may employ staff.
■ Partnership. Two or more people who set up a business together. 
The partners have joint ownership and share the risk and reward 
of running the business. Like a sole trader they may employ staff.
■ Limited liability partnership (LLP). A hybrid of a partnership 
and a company which provides the owners with the limited 
risk of a company and the shared ownership and tax status of a 
partnership.
■ Private company. Usually a small organisation raising its money 
from a few private investors. The shares may be difficult to trade 
as they are not listed on any stock market. Investors’ liability in 
private and public companies is limited to the amount of their 
investment.
■ Public company. Typically a large organisation that is usually 
listed on a stock exchange. Because of its size it may require 
significant investment, and hence it may need to draw investment 
from many investors.
In this book the focus is mainly on companies, though the principles 
can be equally well applied to a sole trader, a partnership and indeed 
not-for-profit organisations.
The role of the board 
The directors of a company are people hired (and at times fired) by the 
shareholders to be stewards of their investment. However, they need 
to balance this with their primary fiduciary duty as a director, which 
is to act in the best interests of the company. Collectively, a board of 
directors has overall responsibility for running a company successfully. 
This is achieved by setting and implementing its strategy.
2017 Guide Financial Management.indd 2 22/01/2018 13:36
Defining a successful business 3
In fulfilling the strategic aims of the company, the board will 
be responsible for making sure not only that the company has the 
necessary resources in terms of investment, assets and people, but 
also that there are appropriate operating controls and procedures for 
managing business risk and making sure that all monies that flow 
through the business are properly accounted for.
What is a successful business? 
The media love to report on successful entrepreneurs and tell of how 
they beat the odds as they built their business and became household 
names. The media also enjoy revelling in the collapse of mighty 
organisations and unpicking the journey to their downfall. So what is 
it that defines business success or failure?
Many descriptions are used to describe success, including “the 
business is profitable”, “revenue is growing” and “the share price is 
rising”. All these attributes are elements of success, though individually 
they do not embrace the totality. To be successful in business is to 
“create a sustainable superior return on investment”.
The core element of this definition is “return on investment” (ROI). 
The business, having been built from money provided by investors, has 
a responsibility to reward those investors for risking their money in 
the venture. The ROI is a measure of the reward being generated. The 
concept is similar to a savings account, where an amount of money 
is placed on deposit with a bank and the investor earns interest on it. 
Despite the banking crisis of 2008 and its aftermath, the investment in 
a savings account is still seen as low risk and consequently the return 
that the investor will make is similarly low.

Therefore, if a deposit of $1,000 is placed in a bank and the gross 
interest earned over a year is $30, the ROI can be expressed as being 3%.
For a business to be successful it needs to reward investors by 
making them wealthier than they would have been by putting their 
money in a savings account. Why should they accept the greater risk 
of investing in a business, with all the uncertainty it faces, if they are 
2017 Guide Financial Management.indd 3 22/01/2018 13:36
4 guide to financial management
not going to be any better off? The return that investors would require 
might be double or more than a savings account, depending on the 
perceived risk, which will be related to factors such as the nature and 
maturity of the business.
The return in a business is derived from the profit it generates 
compared with the money invested to achieve that profit.

Therefore, if investors place $1,000 in a business and the operating 
profit over a year is $200, the ROI can be expressed as being 20%. Some 
examples of the returns achieved by companies in 2016 and stated 
in their annual reports are Walmart (a retailer) 15.5%, ExxonMobil 
(an oil company) 3.9% and Anglo American (an international mining 
company) 11.0%. 
Generating a “superior” return is to achieve a ROI that is greater than 
the rate achieved by businesses running similar activities in similar 
markets, and so to be successful is to generate a return that is at least as 
good as that achieved by your competitors, but ideally better than them.
A “sustainable” superior return is perhaps the most difficult 
objective to achieve. It means generating a superior rate of return year 
in, year out. A business may be flying high when its products or services 
are in fashion. But the fall can be swift when its products or services 
are no longer in vogue and the business has gone from producing 
superior returns to producing inferior ones. To be sustainable is to 
continuously develop the business proposition in a way that keeps 
customers buying the company’s products or services in preference to 
those of its competitors. Innovation, technology and cost reduction are 
all activities that can help maintain a sustainable return.
For example, the returns generated by the mobile phone company 
Nokia in 2006 were almost 46%. They resulted from a pre-eminence 
in a growing market coupled with an ability to continue to introduce 
new technology and ignite passion for the company’s latest products. 
Subsequently, Nokia failed to offer leading technology and was late in 
offering smartphones. As a result, it lost customers and the superior 
returns declined; in 2012 Nokia reported losses of €2.3 billion and was 
finally bought by Microsoft in April 2014.

At the same time as Nokia was declining, Apple, its American rival, 
was rising. The two companies’ ROI between 2006 and 2012 is shown 
in Figure 1.1.
On creating a superior ROI the directors of a company have two 
choices. They can either distribute the wealth to the investors or retain 
it in the business. The second option depends on whether the directors 
can identify further investment opportunities that will create even 
more wealth in the future. Profits can be retained in a company while 
investment opportunities are identified. However, this is only in the 
short term as investors (particularly in public companies) will demand 
the cash be “earning or returning”.
Wealth is created for investors in a business in two ways:
■ annual income – a distribution of profit to the investor (by way of 
a dividend);
■ capital growth – a reinvestment back in the business to increase 
its value (share price).
Shareholder value 
The term “shareholder value” is also used to describe success. Two 
definitions of shareholder value are:
■ a concept that focuses strategic and operational decision-making 
on steadily increasing a company’s value for shareholders;
■ maximising shareholder benefit by focusing on raising company 
earnings and the share price.
These definitions focus more on increasing the value of a business 
in the long term rather than delivering a profit in the short term. An 
example would be Amazon, one of the best-known online retailers, 
where the initial strategy was to invest in building the distribution 
network and customer base as the foundation of the business. Once 
customer numbers grew the profits would emerge. Throughout its 
early years the company was creating long-term value while making 
large losses. During this period Amazon’s share price was volatile as 
it reflected changing views on the future benefits that would arise for 
investors.
For a mature business, an example would be its investment in 
research and development to provide the products and revenue streams 
of the future. This investment can create shareholder value because 
of the potential it is judged to provide. However, the danger is that 
success is built on a future promise, and in a fast-changing world the 
future is always uncertain. For example, AstraZeneca, a pharmaceutical 
company, had taken years to develop a new lung cancer drug only to find 
in July 2017 that the trials had failed: its share price fell 16% in one day.
For a company that is quoted on a stock market, there is the 
expectation to achieve a sufficient ROI every year while also investing 
to create future value. Once the business has started to make profits, 
any performance that is worse than the previous year is likely to meet 
with an adverse reaction from analysts and investors, which in many 
instances can lead to a forced change of management.
In February 2017 Unilever, a food company, defended a hostile bid 
from Kraft Foods on the basis that it would complete a “comprehensive 
review of options available to accelerate delivery of value for the 
benefit of our shareholders”. Like all other global companies, it battles 
to produce the ever more superior results that stockmarket investors 
look for.
The details of the measures used to monitor ROI and shareholder 
value creation are explained in Chapter 14.