47. Before November 30, 2021, Head Start rules (45 C.F.R. § 1302.94(a)) governed volunteer health only to the following limited extent: (a) A program must ensure regular volunteers have been screened for appropriate communicable diseases in accordance with state, tribal or local laws. In the absence of state, tribal or local law, the Health Services Advisory Committee must be consulted regarding the need for such screenings. 
48. But now the Interim Final Rule revises paragraph (a) to read as follows: (a) A program must ensure volunteers have been screened for appropriate communicable diseases in accordance with state, tribal or local laws. In the absence of state, tribal, or local law, the Health Services Advisory Committee must be consulted regarding the need for such screenings. (1) All volunteers in classrooms or working directly with children other than their own must be fully vaccinated for COVID-19, other than those volunteers: (i) For whom a vaccine is medically contraindicated; (ii) For whom medical necessity requires a delay in vaccination; or (iii) Who are legally entitled to an accommodation with regard to the COVID19 vaccination requirements based on an applicable Federal law. (2) Those granted an accommodation outlined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section must undergo SARS-CoV-2 testing for current infection at least weekly with those who have negative test results to remain in the classroom or work directly with children. Those with positive test results must be immediately excluded from the facility, so they are away from children and staff until they are determined to no longer be infectious. 86 Fed. Reg. at 68,101. 
49. The new paragraphs require volunteers to be vaccinated, and to get tested weekly if granted an accommodation against being vaccinated. No such requirement existed in the prior version. 
50. Before November 30, 2021, Head Start rules (45 C.F.R. § 1302.47(b)(5)) governed child safety only to the following limited extent: (5) Safety practices. All staff and consultants follow appropriate practices to keep children safe during all activities, including, at a minimum: (i) Reporting of suspected or known child abuse and neglect, including that staff comply with applicable federal, state, local, and tribal laws; (ii) Safe sleep practices, including ensuring that all sleeping arrangements for children under 18 months of age use firm mattresses or cots, as appropriate, and for children under 12 months, soft bedding materials or toys must not be used; (iii) Appropriate indoor and outdoor supervision of children at all times; (iv) Only releasing children to an authorized adult, and; (v) All standards of conduct described in § 1302.90(c). 9 
51. The Interim Final Rule adds paragraph (b)(5)(vi) to read as follows: (vi) Masking, using masks recommended by CDC, for all individuals 2 years of age or older when there are two or more individuals in a vehicle owned, leased, or arranged by the Head Start program; indoors in a setting when Head Start services are provided; and for those not fully vaccinated, outdoors in crowded settings or during activities that involve sustained close contact with other people, except: (A) Children or adults when they are either eating or drinking; (B) Children when they are napping; (C) When a person cannot wear a mask, or cannot safely wear a mask, because of a disability as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act; or (D) When a child’s health care provider advises an alternative face covering to accommodate the child’s special health care needs. 86 Fed. Reg. at 68,101. 
52. The new paragraph requires masking. No such requirement existed in the prior version. 
53. Paragraph (vi) applies to all “individuals 2 years of age or older” who are “indoors in a setting when Head Start services are provided” and “outdoors in crowded settings or during activities that involve sustained close contact with other people” According to the Interim Final Rule, “The Office of Head Start notes that being outdoors with children inherently includes sustained close contact for the purposes of caring for and supervising children.” 86 Fed. Reg. at 68,060. Thus, the Mask Mandate appears to also apply to parents who enter a Head Start facility (either when dropping off or picking up their child or at any other time) and to parents are outside with their children (either when dropping them off, picking them up, or at any other time), since being outside with children “inherently includes sustained close contact.”
