User Manual
Version 1.1
Table of Contents
Get started 7
What's in the box 7
Charge your watch 8
Set up Versa 3 9
Connect to Wi-Fi 9
See your data in the Fitbit app 10
Unlock Fitbit Premium 11
Advanced health metrics 11
Premium health and wellness reminders 12
Wear Versa 3 13
Placement for all-day wear vs. exercise 13
Fasten the band 14
Handedness 15
Wear and care tips 16
Change the band 16
Remove a band 16
Attach a band 17
Basics 18
Navigate Versa 3 18
Basic navigation 18
Button shortcuts 19
Widgets 22
Adjust settings 23
Display 24
Vibration & audio 24
Goal reminders 24
Quiet modes 24
Shortcuts 25
Check battery level 25
Set up device lock 26
2
Adjust always-on display 26
Turn off the screen 28
Care for Versa 3 28
Apps and Clock Faces 29
Change the clock face 29
Open apps 30
Organize apps 30
Download additional apps 30
Remove apps 30
Update apps 31
Adjust app settings and permissions 31
Voice Assistant 32
Set up Amazon Alexa Built-in 32
Interact with Alexa 32
Check Alexa alarms, reminders, and timers 34
Lifestyle 35
Starbucks 35
Agenda 35
Weather 35
Check the weather 36
Add or remove a city 36
Find Phone 36
Notifications from your phone 38
Set up notifications 38
See incoming notifications 38
Manage notifications 39
Turn off notifications 39
Answer or reject phone calls 40
Respond to messages (Android phones) 41
Timekeeping 42
Use the Alarms app 42
Dismiss or snooze an alarm 42
3
Use the Timer app 43
Activity and Wellness 44
See your stats 44
Track a daily activity goal 45
Choose a goal 45
Track your hourly activity 45
Track your sleep 46
Set a sleep goal 46
Learn about your sleep habits 46
Practice guided breathing 47
Exercise and Heart Health 48
Track your exercise automatically 48
Track and analyze exercise with the Exercise app 49
Track an exercise 49
Customize your exercise settings 50
Check your workout summary 51
Check your heart rate 51
Custom heart-rate zones 53
Earn Active Zone Minutes 53
View your cardio fitness score 53
Work out with Fitbit Coach 54
Share your activity 54
Music 55
Connect Bluetooth headphones or speakers 55
Control music with Versa 3 55
Choose the music source 56
Control music 56
Control music with the Spotify - Connect & Control app 56
Listen to music with the Pandora app (United States only) 57
Listen to music with the Deezer app 57
Fitbit Pay 58
Use credit and debit cards 58
4
Set up Fitbit Pay 58
Make purchases 59
Change your default card 60
Pay for transit 60
Update, Restart, and Erase 62
Update Versa 3 62
Restart Versa 3 62
Shutdown Versa 3 63
Erase Versa 3 63
Troubleshooting 64
Heart-rate signal missing 64
GPS signal missing 64
Can't connect to Wi-Fi 65
Other issues 66
General Info and Specifications 67
Sensors and Components 67
Materials 67
Wireless technology 68
Haptic feedback 68
Battery 68
Memory 68
Display 68
Band size 68
Environmental conditions 69
Learn more 69
Return policy and warranty 69
Regulatory and Safety Notices 70
USA: Federal Communications Commission (FCC) statement 70
Canada: Industry Canada (IC) statement 71
European Union (EU) 72
IP Rating 73
Argentina 74
5
Australia and New Zealand 74
Belarus 74
Botswana 75
China 75
Customs Union 77
Indonesia 77
Israel 77
Japan 77
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 78
Mexico 78
Moldova 78
Morocco 79
Nigeria 79
Oman 79
Pakistan 79
Philippines 80
Serbia 80
Singapore 80
South Korea 80
Taiwan 82
United Arab Emirates 84
Vietnam 85
Zambia 85
Safety Statement 85
6
Get started
Meet Fitbit Versa 3, the health and fitness smartwatch with built-in GPS, Active
Zone Minutes, 20+ exercise modes, and music experiences to keep you motivated
to move.
Take a moment to review our complete safety information at fitbit.com/safety.
Versa 3 is not intended to provide medical or scientific data.
What's in the box
Your Versa 3 box includes:
Watch with small band
(color and material varies) Charging cable Additional large band
The detachable bands on Versa 3 come in a variety of colors and materials, sold
separately.
7
Charge your watch
A fully-charged Versa 3 has a battery life of 6+ days. Battery life and charge cycles
vary with use and other factors; actual results will vary.
To charge Versa 3:
1. Plug the charging cable into the USB port on your computer, a UL-certified
USB wall charger, or another low-energy charging device.
2. Hold the other end of the charging cable near the port on the back of the
watch until it attaches magnetically. Make sure the pins on the charging cable
align with the port on the back of your watch.
Charge Versa 3 for 12 minutes for 24 hours of battery life. While the watch charges,
tap the screen twice or press the button to turn the screen on. The battery level
appears for several seconds, then disappears so you can use your watch while it
charges. Charging fully takes about 1-2 hours.
8
Set up Versa 3
Set up Versa 3 with the Fitbit app for iPhones and iPads or Android phones. The
Fitbit app is compatible with most popular phones and tablets. See
fitbit.com/devices to check if your phone or tablet is compatible.
To get started:
1. Download the Fitbit app:
l Apple App Store for iPhones and iPads
l Google Play Store for Android phones
2. Install the app, and open it.
l If you already have a Fitbit account, log in to your account > tap the
Today tab > your profile picture > Set Up a Device.
l If you don't have a Fitbit account, tap Join Fitbit to be guided through a
series of questions to create a Fitbit account.
3. Continue to follow the on-screen instructions to connect Versa 3 to your
account.
When you're done with setup, read through the guide to learn more about your
new watch and then explore the Fitbit app.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Connect to Wi-Fi
During setup, you're prompted to connect Versa 3 to your Wi-Fi network. Versa 3
uses Wi-Fi to more quickly transfer music from Pandora or Deezer, download apps
9
from the Fitbit App Gallery, and for faster, more reliable OS updates.
Versa 3 can connect to open, WEP, WPA personal, and WPA2 personal Wi-Fi
networks. Your watch won't connect to 5GHz, WPA enterprise, or public Wi-Fi
networks that require more than a password to connect—for example, logins,
subscriptions, or profiles. If you see fields for a username or domain when
connecting to the Wi-Fi network on a computer, the network isn't supported.
For best results, connect Versa 3 to your home Wi-Fi network. Make sure you know
the network password before connecting.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
See your data in the Fitbit app
Open the Fitbit app on your phone or tablet to view your activity and sleep data,
log food and water, participate in challenges, and more.
10
Unlock Fitbit Premium
Fitbit Premium helps you build healthy habits by offering tailored workouts,
insights into how your behavior impacts your health, and personalized plans to help
you reach your goals. A Fitbit Premium subscription includes health insights and
guidance, advanced health metrics, sleep details, customized programs, and 150+
workouts from fitness brands. New Fitbit Premium customers can redeem a free
trial.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Advanced health metrics
Know your body better with health metrics in the Fitbit app. This feature helps you
view key metrics tracked by your Fitbit device over time so that you can see trends
and assess what’s changed.
Metrics include:
l Oxygen saturation (SpO2)
l Skin temperature variation
l Heart rate variability
l Resting heart rate
l Breathing rate
Note: This feature is not intended to diagnose or treat any medical condition and
should not be relied on for any medical purposes. It is intended to provide
information that can help you manage your well-being. If you have any concerns
about your health, please talk to a healthcare provider. If you believe you are
experiencing a medical emergency, call emergency services.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
11
Premium health and wellness reminders
Set up Premium health and wellness reminders in the Fitbit app, and receive
reminders on your watch that encourage you to form and maintain healthy
behaviors. For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
12
Wear Versa 3
Wear Versa 3 around your wrist. If you need to attach a different size band, or if you
purchased another band, see the instructions in "Change the band" on page 16.
Placement for all-day wear vs. exercise
When you're not exercising, wear Versa 3 a finger's width above your wrist bone.
In general, it's always important to give your wrist a break on a regular basis by
removing your watch for around an hour after extended wear. We recommend
removing your watch while you shower. Although you can shower while wearing
your watch, not doing so reduces the potential for exposure to soaps, shampoos,
and conditioners, which can cause long-term damage to your watch and may cause
skin irritation.
For optimized heart-rate tracking while exercising:
l During workouts, try moving the band higher on your wrist to get a better fit.
If you experience any discomfort, loosen the band, and if it persists give your
wrist a break by taking it off.
13
l Wear your watch on top of your wrist, and make sure the back of the device is
in contact with your skin.
Fasten the band
1. Place Versa 3 around your wrist.
2. Slide the bottom band through the first loop in the top band.
14
3. Tighten the band until it fits comfortably, and press the peg through one of
the holes in the band.
4. Slide the loose end of the band through the second loop until it lies flat on
your wrist. Make sure the band isn’t too tight. Wear the band loosely enough
that it can move back and forth on your wrist.
Handedness
For greater accuracy, you must specify whether you wear Versa 3 on your dominant
or non-dominant hand. Your dominant hand is the one you use for writing and
eating. To start, the Wrist setting is set to non-dominant. If you wear Versa 3 on
your dominant hand, change the Wrist setting in the Fitbit app:
From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3 tile
> Wrist > Dominant.
15
Wear and care tips
l Clean your band and wrist regularly with a soap-free cleanser.
l If your watch gets wet, remove and dry it completely after your activity.
l Take your watch off from time to time.
l If you notice skin irritation, remove your watch and contact customer support.
For more information, see fitbit.com/productcare.
Change the band
Versa 3 comes with a small band attached and an additional large, bottom band in
the box. Both the top and bottom bands can be swapped with accessory bands,
sold separately on fitbit.com. For band measurements, see "Band size" on page 68.
Fitbit Sense bands are compatible with Versa 3.
Remove a band
1. Turn over Versa 3 and find the band latches.
2. To release the latch, slide the flat button toward the band.
16
3. Gently pull the band away from the watch to release it.
4. Repeat on the other side.
Attach a band
To attach a band, press it into the end of the watch until you hear a click and it
snaps into place. The band with the loops and peg attaches to the top of the watch.
17
Basics
Learn how to manage settings, set a personal PIN code, navigate the screen, and
care for your watch.
Navigate Versa 3
Versa 3 has a color AMOLED touchscreen display and 1 button.
Navigate Versa 3 by tapping the screen, swiping side to side and up and down, or
pressing the button. To preserve battery, the watch’s screen turns off when not in
use, unless you turn on the always-on display setting. For more information, see
"Adjust always-on display" on page 26.
Basic navigation
The home screen is the clock.
l Swipe down to see notifications.
l Swipe up to see widgets, such as your daily stats, the weather, and a shortcut
to start the Relax app.
l Swipe left to see the apps on your watch.
l Swipe right to open quick settings or return to the previous screen in an app.
l Press the button to return to the clock face.
18
Button shortcuts
Use the button to quickly access Fitbit Pay, voice assistant, quick settings, or your
favorite apps.
Press and hold the button
Hold the button for 2 seconds to activate a feature of your choice. The first time you
use the button shortcut, select which feature it activates. To change which feature
activates when you hold the button, open the Settings app on your watch and
tap Shortcuts. Tap Press & hold, and select the app you want.
19
Double-press the button
Double-press the button to open shortcuts to 4 apps or features. To start, the 4
shortcuts are music controls , quick settings , your voice assistant, and Fitbit
Pay . To change these shortcuts, open the Settings app on your watch and
tap Shortcuts. Under Double Press, tap the shortcut you want to change.
Quick settings
Swipe right from the clock face on your watch to access quick settings.
20
Do Not Disturb When the do not disturb setting is on:
l Notifications, goal celebrations, and reminders
are muted.
l The do not disturb icon illuminates in quick
settings.
You can't turn on do not disturb and sleep mode at the same
time.
Sleep Mode When the sleep mode setting is on:
l Notifications, goal celebrations, and reminders
are muted.
l The screen's brightness is set to dim.
l The Always-On Display clock face is turned off.
l The screen stays dark when you turn your wrist.
l The sleep mode icon illuminates in quick
settings.
Sleep mode turns off automatically when you set a sleep
schedule. To set a schedule:
1. Open the Settings app and tap Quiet modes.
2. Under Sleep mode, tap Schedule mode > Off-
hours.
3. Tap the start or stop time to adjust when the
mode turns on and off. Swipe up or down to
change the time, and tap the time to select it.
Sleep mode automatically turns off at the time
you schedule, even if you manually turned it on.
You can't turn on do not disturb and sleep mode at the same
time.
Screen Wake When you set screen wake to automatic , the screen turns
on each time you turn your wrist.
21
When you set screen wake to manual, press the button or
tap the screen to turn on the display.
Brightness Adjust the screen brightness.
Always-On Display Turn always-on display on or off. For more information, see
"Adjust always-on display" on page 26.
Music Volume Adjust the volume of music playing through headphones or
speakers paired to your watch. For more information, see
"Connect Bluetooth headphones or speakers" on page 55.
Widgets
Add widgets to your watch to see your daily stats, log your water intake or weight,
check the weather forecast, and start a session in the Relax app, and more. To see
your widgets, swipe up from the clock face.
To add a new widget:
22
1. From the clock face, swipe up to the bottom of the widgets, and tap Manage.
2. Under More Widgets, tap the icon next to the widget you want to add.
3. Swipe up to the bottom of the page, and tap Done.
To turn off a widget:
1. From the clock face, swipe up to the bottom of the widgets, and tap Manage.
2. Tap the > icon next to the widget you want to adjust.
3. Tap the switch icon next to Show Widget to turn it off.
4. Swipe up to the bottom of the page, and tap Done.
To adjust the information you see on a widget:
1. From the clock face, swipe up to the bottom of the widgets, and tap Manage.
2. Tap the > icon next to the widget you want to adjust.
3. Adjust any settings you want to change.
4. Swipe up to the bottom of the page, and tap Done.
To change the order of widgets:
1. From the clock face, swipe up to the bottom of the widgets, and tap Manage.
2. Press and hold the widget you want to move, and drag it up or down in the
list of widgets. When it's in the correct new location, lift your finger.
3. Swipe up to the bottom of the page, and tap Done.
Adjust settings
Manage basic settings in the Settings app :
23
Display
Brightness Change the screen's brightness.
Screen wake Change whether the screen turns on when you turn your wrist.
Screen
timeout
Adjust the amount of time before the screen turns off or switches to the
always-on display clock face.
Always-on
display
Turn always-on display on or off, and change the type of clock face shown.
Vibration & audio
Vibration Adjust your watch's vibration strength.
Microphone Choose whether your watch can access the microphone.
Bluetooth Manage connected Bluetooth devices.
Goal reminders
Active Zone Minutes goal Turn Active Zone Minutes weekly goal notifications on or off.
Quiet modes
Focus mode Turn off notifications while using the Exercise app .
Do not
disturb
Turn off all notifications.
Sleep mode Adjust sleep mode settings, including setting a schedule for the mode to
automatically turn on and off.
Alexa
notifications
Turn Amazon Alexa notifications off.
24
Shortcuts
Press
& hold
Choose the app or feature you want to open when you press and hold the
button.
Double
Press
Choose 4 apps or features to appear as shortcuts when you double-press the
button.
Tap a setting to adjust it. Swipe up to see the full list of settings.
Check battery level
From the clock face, swipe right. The battery level icon is at the top of the screen.
Wi-Fi won't work on Versa 3 when the battery is 25% or less, and you'll be unable to
update your device.
If your watch's battery is low (fewer than 24 hours remaining), a red battery
indicator appears on the clock face. If your watch's battery is critically low (fewer
than 4 hours remaining), the battery indicator flashes. When the battery is low:
l The screen brightness is set to dim
l The vibration strength is set to light
l If you’re tracking an exercise with GPS, GPS tracking turns off
l Always-on display is turned off
l You can't use the voice assistant feature
l You can't use quick replies
25
l You can't use music controls
l You won't receive notifications from your phone
Charge Versa 3 to use or adjust these features.
Set up device lock
To help keep your watch secure, turn on device lock in the Fitbit app, which
prompts you to enter a personal 4-digit PIN code to unlock your watch. If you set
up Fitbit Pay to make contactless payments from your watch, device lock is turned
on automatically and you're required to set a code. If you don't use Fitbit Pay,
device lock is optional.
Turn on device lock or reset your PIN code in the Fitbit app:
From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3 tile
> Device Lock.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Adjust always-on display
Turn on always-on display to show the time on your watch, even when you're not
interacting with the screen. Many clock faces and certain apps have an always-on
display mode.
26
To turn always-on display on or off, swipe right from the clock face to open quick
settings. Tap the always-on display icon .
Note that turning on this feature impacts your watch's battery life. When always-on
display is turned on, Versa 3 requires more frequent charging.
Clock faces without an always-on display mode use a default always-on display
clock face. Choose between an analog or digital clock face. Open the Settings app
> Display. In the Always-on display section, tap Analog or Digital.
Always-on display automatically turns off when your watch's battery is critically
low.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
27
Turn off the screen
To turn off your watch's screen when not in use, briefly cover the watch face with
your opposite hand, press the buttons, or turn your wrist away from your body.
Note that if you turn on the always-on display setting, the screen won't turn off.
Care for Versa 3
It's important to clean and dry Versa 3 regularly. For more information, see
fitbit.com/productcare.
28
Apps and Clock Faces
The Fitbit Gallery offers apps and clock faces to personalize your watch and meet a
variety of health, fitness, timekeeping, and everyday needs.
Change the clock face
The Fitbit Clock Gallery offers a variety of clock faces to personalize your watch.
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Clock Faces > All Clocks.
3. Browse the available clock faces. Tap a clock face to see a detailed view.
4. Tap Select to add the clock face to Versa 3.
Save up to 5 clock faces to switch between them:
l When you select a new clock face, it’s automatically saved unless you already
have 5 saved clock faces.
l To see your saved clock faces from your watch, open the Clocks app and
swipe to find the clock face you want to use. Tap to select it.
l To see your saved clock faces in the Fitbit app, tap the Today tab > your
profile picture > your device image > Clock Faces. See your saved clock faces
in My Clock Faces.
29
l To remove a clock face, tap the clock face > Remove clock face.
l To switch to a saved clock face, tap the clock face > Select.
Open apps
From the clock face, swipe left to see the apps installed on your watch. To open an
app, tap it.
Organize apps
To change the placement of an app on Versa 3, press and hold an app until it's
selected, and drag it to a new location. The app is selected when the icon increases
slightly in size and the watch vibrates.
Download additional apps
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Apps > All Apps.
3. Browse the available apps. When you find one you want to install, tap it.
4. Tap Install to add the app to Versa 3.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Remove apps
You can remove most apps installed on Versa 3:
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Apps.
3. In the My Apps tab, tap the app you want to remove. You may have to swipe
up to find it.
4. Tap Remove.
30
Update apps
Apps update over Wi-Fi as needed. Versa 3 searches for updates when plugged
into the charger and in range of your Wi-Fi network.
You can also manually update apps:
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Apps.
3. In the My Apps tab, find the app you want to update. You may have to swipe
up to find it.
4. Tap the pink Update button next to the app.
Adjust app settings and permissions
Many apps include options to adjust the notifications, allow certain permissions, and
customize what it displays. Note that turning off any app permissions might cause
the app to stop functioning.
To access these settings:
1. With your watch nearby, in the Fitbit app, tap the Today tab > your
profile picture > your device image.
2. Tap Apps or Clock Faces.
3. Tap the app or clock face whose settings you want to change. You may have
to swipe up to see some apps.
4. Tap Settings or Permissions.
5. Tap Back or Details when you're done making changes.
31
Voice Assistant
Check the weather, set timers and alarms, control your smart home devices, and
more by speaking to your watch.
Set up Amazon Alexa Built-in
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Amazon Alexa > Sign in with Amazon.
3. Tap Get Started.
4. Log in to your Amazon account or create one if necessary.
5. Follow the on-screen instructions and read about what Alexa can do, and tap
Close to return to your device settings in the Fitbit app.
To change the language Alexa recognizes or disconnect your Amazon account:
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Amazon Alexa.
3. Tap the current language to change it, or tap Logout to stop using Alexa on
your watch.
Interact with Alexa
1. Open the Alexa app on your watch. Note that the Fitbit app must be
running in the background on your phone.
2. Say your request.
32
You don't need to say "Alexa" before speaking your request. For example:
l Set a timer for 10 minutes.
l Set an alarm for 8:00 a.m.
l What's the temperature outside?
l Remind me to make dinner at 6:00 p.m.
l How much protein is in an egg?
l Ask Fitbit to start a run.*
l Start a bike ride with Fitbit.*
*To ask Alexa to open the Exercise app on your watch, you must first set up the
Fitbit skill for Alexa. For more information, see help.fitbit.com. These commands are
currently available in English, German, French, Italian, Spanish, and Japanese.
Amazon Alexa not available in all countries. For more information, see
fitbit.com/voice.
Note that saying “Alexa” doesn’t activate Alexa on your watch—you must open the
Alexa app on your watch before the microphone turns on. The microphone turns off
when you close Alexa, or when your watch’s screen turns off.
For added functionality, install the Amazon Alexa app on your phone. With the app,
your watch can access additional Alexa skills.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
33
Check Alexa alarms, reminders, and timers
1. Open the Alexa app on your watch.
2. Tap the alerts icon and swipe up to view your alarms, reminders, and
timers.
3. Tap an alarm to turn it on or off. To adjust or cancel a reminder or timer, tap
the Alexa icon and say your request.
Note that Alexa's alarms and timers are separate from those you set in the Alarms
app or Timer app .
34
Lifestyle
Use apps to stay connected to what you care about most. See "Apps and Clock
Faces" on page 29 for instructions on how to add and delete apps.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Starbucks
Add your Starbucks card or Starbucks Rewards program number in the Fitbit App
Gallery in the Fitbit app, and then use the Starbucks app to pay from your
wrist.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Agenda
Connect your phone's calendar in the Fitbit app to see upcoming calendar events
for today and tomorrow in the Agenda app on your watch.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Weather
See the weather in your current location, as well as 2 additional locations you
choose, in the Weather app on your watch.
35
Check the weather
Open the Weather app to see conditions in your current location. Swipe up to view
the weather in other locations you added. Tap a location to see a more detailed
report.
You can also add a weather widget to your watch. For more information, see
"Widgets" on page 22.
If the weather for your current location doesn't appear, check that you turned on
location services for the Fitbit app. If you change locations or don't see updated
data for your current location, sync your watch to see your new location and latest
data in the Weather app or widget.
Choose your unit of temperature in the Fitbit app. For more information, see
help.fitbit.com.
Add or remove a city
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Apps.
3. In the My Apps tab, tap the gear icon next to Weather. You may need to
swipe up to find the app.
4. Tap Add city to add up to 2 additional locations or tap Edit > the X icon to
delete a location. Note that you can't delete your current location.
Find Phone
Use the Find Phone app to locate your phone.
Requirements:
36
l Your watch must be connected (“paired”) to the phone you want to locate.
l Your phone must have Bluetooth turned on and be within 30 feet (10m) of
your Fitbit device.
l The Fitbit app must be running in the background on your phone.
l Your phone must be turned on.
To find your phone:
l Open the Find Phone app on your watch.
l Tap Find Phone. Your phone rings loudly.
l When you locate your phone, tap Cancel to end the ringtone.
37
Notifications from your phone
Versa 3 can show call, text, calendar, and app notifications from your phone to keep
you informed. Keep your watch within 30 feet of your phone to receive
notifications.
Set up notifications
Check that Bluetooth on your phone is on and that your phone can receive
notifications (often under Settings > Notifications). Then set up notifications:
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Notifications.
3. Follow the on-screen instructions to pair your watch if you haven't already.
Call, text, and calendar notifications are turned on automatically.
4. To turn on notifications from apps installed on your phone, including Fitbit and
WhatsApp, tap App Notifications and turn on the notifications you want to
see.
Note that if you have an iPhone or iPad, Versa 3 shows notifications from all
calendars synced to the Calendar app. If you have an Android phone, Versa 3 shows
calendar notifications from the calendar app you chose during setup.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
See incoming notifications
A notification causes your watch to vibrate. If you don't read the notification when it
arrives, you can check it later by swiping down from the top of the screen.
38
If your watch's battery is critically low, notifications won't cause Versa 3 to vibrate
or the screen to turn on.
Manage notifications
Versa 3 stores up to 30 notifications, after which the oldest are replaced as you
receive new ones.
To manage notifications:
l Swipe down from the top of the screen to see your notifications and tap any
notification to expand it.
l To delete a notification, tap to expand it, then swipe to the bottom and tap
Clear.
l To delete all notifications at once, swipe to the top of your notifications and
tap Clear All.
Turn off notifications
Turn off certain notifications in the Fitbit app, or turn off all notifications in quick
settings on Versa 3. When you turn off all notifications, your watch won't vibrate
and the screen won't turn on when your phone receives a notification.
To turn off certain notifications:
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app on your phone, tap your profile
picture > Versa 3 tile > Notifications.
39
2. Turn off the notifications you no longer want to receive on your watch.
To turn off all notifications:
1. From the clock face, swipe right to access quick settings.
2. Tap the do not disturb icon . All notifications, including goal celebrations
and reminders, are turned off.
Note that if you use the do not disturb setting on your phone, you don't receive
notifications on your watch until you turn off this setting.
Answer or reject phone calls
If paired to an iPhone or Android (8.0+) phone, Versa 3 lets you accept or reject
incoming phone calls. If your phone is running an older version of the Android OS,
you can reject, but not accept, calls on your watch.
To accept a call, tap the green phone icon on your watch's screen. Note that you
can't speak into the watch—accepting a phone call answers the call on your nearby
phone. To reject a call, tap the red phone icon to send the caller to voicemail.
The caller's name appears if that person is in your contacts list; otherwise you see a
phone number.
40
Respond to messages (Android phones)
Respond directly to text messages and notifications from certain apps on your
watch with preset quick replies or by speaking your reply into Versa 3. Keep your
phone nearby with the Fitbit app running in the background to respond to
messages from your watch.
To respond to a message:
1. Open the notification you want to respond to.
2. Choose how to reply to the message:
l Tap the microphone icon to respond to the message using voice-to-
text. To change the language recognized by the microphone, tap
Language. After you speak your reply, tap Send, or tap Retry to try
again. If you notice a mistake after you send the message, tap Undo
within 3 seconds to cancel the message.
l Tap the text icon to respond to a message from a list of quick replies.
l Tap the emoji icon to respond to the message with an emoji.
For more information, including how to customize quick replies, see help.fitbit.com.
41
Timekeeping
Alarms vibrate to wake or alert you at a time you set. Set up to 8 alarms to occur
once or on multiple days of the week. You can also time events with the stopwatch
or set a countdown timer.
Note that alarms and timers you set with a voice assistant are separate from the
ones you set in the Alarms app and Timer app. For more information, see "Voice
Assistant" on page 32.
Use the Alarms app
Set one-time or recurring alarms with the Alarms app . When an alarm goes off,
your watch vibrates.
When setting an alarm, turn on Smart Wake to allow your watch to find the best
time to wake you starting 30 minutes before the alarm time you set. It avoids
waking you during deep sleep so you're more likely to wake up feeling refreshed. If
Smart Wake can’t find the best time to wake you, your alarm alerts you at the set
time.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Dismiss or snooze an alarm
When an alarm goes off, your watch vibrates. To dismiss the alarm, tap the alarm
icon . To snooze the alarm for 9 minutes, tap the snooze icon .
Snooze the alarm as many times as you want. Versa 3 automatically goes into
snooze mode if you ignore the alarm for more than 1 minute.
42
Use the Timer app
Time events with the stopwatch or set a countdown timer with the Timer app
on your watch. You can run the stopwatch and countdown timer at the same time.
When the screen turns off, your watch continues to display the stopwatch or
countdown timer until it ends or you exit the app.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
43
Activity and Wellness
Versa 3 continuously tracks a variety of stats whenever you wear it, including hourly
activity, heart rate, and sleep. Data automatically syncs with the Fitbit app
throughout the day.
See your stats
Open the Today app or swipe up from the clock face to see your daily stats,
including:
Steps Steps taken today and progress toward your daily goal
Heart rate Current heart rate and either your heart-rate zone or resting heart rate
(if not in a zone)
Calories burned Calories burned today and progress toward your daily goal
Floors Floors climbed today and progress toward your daily goal
Distance Distance covered today and progress toward your daily goal
Active Zone
Minutes
Active Zone Minutes earned today and the number of Active Zone
Minutes you're currently earning per minute
Exercise Number of days you met your exercise goal this week
Sleep Sleep duration and sleep score
Hourly activity The number of hours today you met your hourly activity goal
Food Calories eaten and calories remaining today
Menstrual health Information on the current stage of your menstrual cycle, if applicable
Water Water intake logged today and progress toward your daily goal
Weight Current weight and your progress toward your weight goal
Core temp Your most recent logged temperature
44
Tap a tile to view more details or log an entry (for water, weight, and core
temperature).
Find your complete history and other information detected by your watch in the
Fitbit app.
Track a daily activity goal
Versa 3 tracks your progress toward a daily activity goal of your choice. When you
reach your goal, your watch vibrates and shows a celebration.
Choose a goal
Set a goal to help you get started on your health and fitness journey. To begin, your
goal is to take 10,000 steps per day. Choose to change the number of steps, or pick
a different activity goal depending on your device.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Track progress toward your goal on Versa 3. For more information, see "See your
stats" on the previous page.
Track your hourly activity
Versa 3 helps you stay active throughout the day by keeping track of when you're
stationary and reminding you to move.
Reminders nudge you to walk at least 250 steps each hour. You feel a vibration and
see a reminder on your screen at 10 minutes before the hour if you haven't walked
250 steps. When you meet the 250-step goal after receiving the reminder, you feel
a second vibration and see a congratulatory message.
45
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Track your sleep
Wear Versa 3 to bed to automatically track basic stats about your sleep, including
your time asleep, sleep stages (time spent in REM, light sleep, and deep sleep), and
sleep score (the quality of your sleep). Versa 3 also tracks your estimated oxygen
variation throughout the night to help you uncover potential breathing
disturbances. To see your sleep stats, sync your watch when you wake up and
check the Fitbit app, or swipe up from the clock face on your watch to see your
sleep stats.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Set a sleep goal
To start, you have a sleep goal of 8 hours of sleep per night. Customize this goal to
meet your needs.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Learn about your sleep habits
With a Fitbit Premium subscription, see more details about your sleep score and
how you compare to your peers, which can help you build a better sleep routine
and wake up feeling refreshed.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
46
Practice guided breathing
The Relax app on Versa 3 provides personalized guided breathing sessions to
help you find moments of calm throughout the day. All notifications are
automatically disabled during the session.
1. On Versa 3, open the Relax app .
2. Tap Edit to change the duration of the session or turn off the optional
vibration.
3. Tap Start to begin the session. Follow the on-screen instructions.
4. When the session ends, tap Log It to reflect on how you feel, or tap Skip to
skip this step.
5. View your summary, and tap Done to close the app.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
47
Exercise and Heart Health
Track activity with the Exercise app and complete guided workouts with the
Fitbit Coach app right on your wrist.
Check the Fitbit app to share your activity with friends and family, see how your
overall fitness level compares to your peers, and more.
During a workout, you can play music through the Pandora app or Deezer app
on your watch, control music playing in Spotify using the Spotify - Connect
& Control app , or control music playing on your phone.
1. Start music playing in an app or on your phone.
2. Open the Exercise or Coach app and start a workout. To control music playing
while you exercise, double-press the button. Your shortcuts appear.
3. Tap the music controls icon .
4. To return to your workout, press the button.
Note that you need to pair a Bluetooth audio device, such as headphones or a
speaker, to Versa 3 to hear music stored on your watch.
For more information, see "Music" on page 55.
Track your exercise automatically
Versa 3 automatically recognizes and records many high-movement activities
which are at least 15 minutes long. See basic stats about your activity in the Fitbit
app on your phone. From the Today tab , tap the Exercise tile.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
48
Track and analyze exercise with the Exercise app
Track specific exercises with the Exercise app on Versa 3 to see real-time stats,
including heart-rate data, calories burned, elapsed time, and a post-workout
summary on your wrist. For complete workout stats, and a workout intensity map if
you used GPS, tap the Exercise tile in the Fitbit app.
Track an exercise
1. On Versa 3, open the Exercise app and swipe to find an exercise.
2. Tap the exercise to choose it. If the exercise uses GPS, you can wait for the
signal to connect, or start the exercise and GPS will connect when a signal is
available. Note that GPS can take a few minutes to connect.
3. Tap the play icon to begin the exercise, or swipe up to choose an exercise
goal or adjust the settings. For more information on the settings, see
"Customize your exercise settings" on the next page.
4. Tap the large stat to scroll through your real-time stats. To pause your
workout, swipe up and tap the pause icon .
5. When you're done with your workout, swipe up and tap the end icon
> End. Your workout summary appears.
6. Tap Done to close the summary screen.
Notes:
l If you set an exercise goal, your watch alerts you when you’re halfway to your
goal and when you reach the goal.
l If the exercise uses GPS, "GPS connecting..." appears at the top of the screen.
When the screen says "GPS connected" and Versa 3 vibrates, GPS is
connected.
49
Using built-in GPS impacts your watch's battery life. When GPS tracking is turned
on, Versa 3 can track up to 12 hours of continuous exercise.
Customize your exercise settings
Customize settings for each exercise type on your watch. Settings include:
Heart Zone
Notifications
Receive notifications when you hit target heart-rate zones during your
workout. For more information, see help.fitbit.com
Laps Receive notifications when you reach certain milestones during your
workout
Show Stats Choose what stats you want to see when tracking an exercise
GPS Track your route using GPS
Auto-Pause Automatically pause a run or bike ride when you stop moving
Run Detect Track runs automatically without opening the Exercise app
Always-on
Display
Keep the screen on during exercise
Pool Length Set the length of your pool
Interval Adjust the move and rest intervals used during interval training
1. On Versa 3, open the Exercise app .
2. Swipe to find an exercise.
50
3. Swipe up from the bottom of the screen, then swipe up through the list of
settings.
4. Tap a setting to adjust it.
5. When you're done, swipe down until you see the play icon .
Check your workout summary
After you complete a workout, Versa 3 shows a summary of your stats.
Check the Exercise tile in the Fitbit app to see additional stats and a workout
intensity map if you used GPS.
Check your heart rate
Versa 3 personalizes your heart-rate zones using your heart rate reserve, which is
the difference between your maximum heart rate and your resting heart rate. To
help you target the training intensity of your choice, check your heart rate and
heart-rate zone on your watch during exercise. Versa 3 notifies you when you enter
a heart-rate zone.
51
Icon Zone Calculation Description
Below
Zone
Below
40% of
your heart
rate reserve
Below the fat burn zone, your heart beats
at a slower pace.
Fat Burn
Zone
Between
40% and
59% of
your heart
rate reserve
In the fat burn zone, you’re likely in a
moderate activity such as a brisk walk.
Your heart rate and breathing might be
elevated, but you can still carry on a
conversation.
Cardio
Zone
Between
60% and
84% of
your heart
rate reserve
In the cardio zone, you’re likely doing a
vigorous activity such as running or
spinning.
Peak
Zone
Greater
than 85%
of your
heart rate
reserve
In the peak zone, you’re likely doing a
short, intense activity that improves
performance and speed, such as sprinting
or high-intensity interval training.
52
Custom heart-rate zones
Instead of using these heart-rate zones, you can create a custom zone in the Fitbit
app to target a specific heart-rate range.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Earn Active Zone Minutes
Earn Active Zone Minutes for time spent in the fat burn, cardio, or peak heart-rate
zones. To help you maximize your time, you earn 2 Active Zone Minutes for each
minute you’re in the cardio or peak zones.
1 minute in the fat burn zone = 1 Active Zone Minute
1 minute in the cardio or peak zones = 2 Active Zone Minutes
A few moments after you enter a different heart-rate zone during your exercise,
your watch buzzes so that you know how hard you’re working. The number of times
your watch vibrates indicates which zone you’re in:
1 buzz = below zone
2 buzzes = fat burn zone
3 buzzes = cardio zone
4 buzzes = peak zone
To start, your weekly goal is set to 150 Active Zone Minutes. You’ll receive
notifications as you reach your goal.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
View your cardio fitness score
View your overall cardiovascular fitness in the Fitbit app. See your cardio fitness
score and cardio fitness level, which shows how you compare to your peers.
53
In the Fitbit app, tap the Heart-rate tile and swipe left on your heart-rate graph to
see your detailed cardio fitness stats.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Work out with Fitbit Coach
The Fitbit Coach app provides guided bodyweight workouts on your wrist to
help you stay fit anywhere.
1. On Versa 3, open the Fitbit Coach app .
2. Swipe to find a workout.
3. Tap the workout you want. To preview the workout, tap the menu icon .
Press the button to return to the workout.
4. Tap Start.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Share your activity
After you complete a workout, open the Fitbit app to share your stats with friends
and family.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
54
Music
Use apps on your watch to listen to music with Bluetooth headphones or speakers.
Connect Bluetooth headphones or speakers
Connect up to 8 Bluetooth audio devices to listen to music from your watch.
To pair a new Bluetooth audio device:
1. Activate pairing mode on your Bluetooth headphones or speaker.
2. On Versa 3, open the Settings app > Vibration & audio.
3. In the Bluetooth section, tap Manage devices.
4. Swipe up to see the Other devices section. Versa 3 searches for nearby
devices.
5. When Versa 3 finds nearby Bluetooth audio devices, it shows a list on the
screen. Tap the name of the device you want to pair.
When pairing is complete, a check mark appears on the screen.
To listen to music with a different Bluetooth device:
1. On Versa 3, open the Settings app > Vibration & audio.
2. In the Bluetooth section, tap the device you want to use, or pair a new device.
Then wait for a moment for the device to connect.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Control music with Versa 3
Control music playing in an app on Versa 3 or on your phone.
55
Choose the music source
1. Double-press the button on Versa 3. Your shortcuts appear.
2. Tap the music controls icon .
3. The icon in the top-left corner shows whether the music source is currently set
to your phone or your watch . Tap it to change the music source, then
press the button to return to your music controls.
Control music
1. While music is playing, double-press the button. Your shortcuts appear.
2. Tap the music controls icon .
3. Play, pause, or tap the arrow icons to skip to the next track or previous track.
Tap the volume icon to adjust the volume.
Control music with the Spotify - Connect & Control
app
Use the Spotify - Connect & Control app on Versa 3 to control Spotify on your
phone, computer, or other Spotify Connect device. Navigate between playlists, like
songs, and switch between devices from your watch. Note that at this time, the
Spotify - Connect & Control app only controls music playing on your paired device,
so your device must remain nearby and connected to the internet. You need a
56
Spotify Premium subscription to use this app. For more information about Spotify
Premium, see spotify.com.
For instructions, see help.fitbit.com.
Listen to music with the Pandora app (United
States only)
With the Pandora app on Versa 3, download up to 3 of your most-played
Pandora stations or popular curated Workout stations directly to your watch. Note
that you need a paid subscription to Pandora and a Wi-Fi connection to download
stations. For more information about Pandora subscriptions, see help.pandora.com.
For instructions, see help.fitbit.com.
Listen to music with the Deezer app
With the Deezer app on Versa 3, download your Deezer playlists and Flow
directly to your watch. Note that you need a paid subscription to Deezer and a Wi-
Fi connection to download music. For more information about Deezer subscriptions,
see support.deezer.com.
For instructions, see help.fitbit.com.
57
Fitbit Pay
Versa 3 includes a built-in NFC chip, which lets you use your credit and debit cards
on your watch.
Use credit and debit cards
Set up Fitbit Pay in the Wallet section of the Fitbit app, and use your watch to make
purchases in stores that accept contactless payments.
We’re always adding new locations and card issuers to our list of partners. To see if
your payment card works with Fitbit Pay, see fitbit.com/fitbit-pay/banks.
Set up Fitbit Pay
To use Fitbit Pay, add at least 1 credit or debit card from a participating bank to the
Wallet section of the Fitbit app. The Wallet is where you add and remove payment
cards, set a default card for your watch, edit a payment method, and review recent
purchases.
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap the Wallet tile.
3. Follow the on-screen instructions to add a payment card. In some cases, your
bank might require additional verification. If you're adding a card for the first
time, you might be prompted to set a 4-digit PIN code for your watch. Note
that you also need passcode protection enabled for your phone.
4. After you add a card, follow the on-screen instructions to turn on notifications
for your phone (if you haven't already done so) to complete the setup.
You can add up to 6 payment cards to the Wallet and choose which card to set as
the default payment option.
58
Make purchases
Make purchases using Fitbit Pay at any store that accepts contactless payments. To
determine if the store accepts Fitbit Pay, look for the symbol below on the payment
terminal:
1. Open the Wallet app on your watch.
2. If prompted, enter your 4-digit watch PIN code. Your default card appears on
the screen.
3. To pay with your default card, hold your wrist near the payment terminal. To
pay with a different card, swipe to find the card you want to use, and hold
your wrist near the payment terminal.
59
When the payment succeeds, your watch vibrates and you see a confirmation on
the screen.
If the payment terminal doesn't recognize Fitbit Pay, make sure the watch face is
near the reader and that the cashier knows you're using a contactless payment.
For added security, you must wear Versa 3 on your wrist to use Fitbit Pay.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Change your default card
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap the Wallet tile.
3. Find the card you want to set as the default option.
4. Tap Set as Default on Versa 3.
Pay for transit
Use Fitbit Pay to tap on and off at transit readers that accept contactless credit or
debit card payments. To pay with your watch, follow the steps listed in "Use credit
and debit cards" on page 58.
60
Pay with the same card on your Fitbit watch when you tap the transit reader at the
start and end of your trip. Make sure your device is charged before beginning your
trip.
61
Update, Restart, and Erase
Some troubleshooting steps may require you to restart your watch, while erasing it
is useful if you want to give Versa 3 to another person. Update your watch to
receive new Fitbit OS updates.
Update Versa 3
Update your watch to get the latest feature enhancements and product updates.
When an update is available, a notification appears in the Fitbit app. After you start
the update, follow the progress bars on Versa 3 and in the Fitbit app until the
update is complete. Keep your watch and phone close to each other during the
update.
Updating Versa 3 takes several minutes and may be demanding on the battery. We
recommend plugging your watch into the charger before starting the update.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Restart Versa 3
If you can’t sync Versa 3 or you have trouble with tracking your stats or receiving
notifications, restart your watch from your wrist:
To restart your watch, press and hold the button for 10 seconds until you see the
Fitbit logo on the screen, and then release the button.
Restarting your watch reboots the device but doesn't delete any data.
Versa 3 has small holes on the device for the altimeter, speaker, and microphone.
Don’t attempt to restart your device by inserting any items, such as paper clips, into
these holes as you can damage Versa 3.
62
Shutdown Versa 3
To turn off your watch, open the Settings app > Shut down.
To turn on your watch, press the button.
For information about how to store Versa 3 long term, see help.fitbit.com.
Erase Versa 3
If you want to give Versa 3 to another person or wish to return it, first clear your
personal data:
On Versa 3, open the Settings app > About Versa 3 > Factory reset.
63
Troubleshooting
If Versa 3 isn't working properly, see our troubleshooting steps below. Visit
help.fitbit.com for more information.
Heart-rate signal missing
Versa 3 continuously tracks your heart rate while you're exercising and throughout
the day. If the heart-rate sensor on your watch has difficulty detecting a signal,
dashed lines appear.
If your watch doesn't detect a heart-rate signal, make sure you're wearing your
watch correctly, either by moving it higher or lower on your wrist or by tightening
or loosening the band. Versa 3 should be in contact with your skin. After holding
your arm still and straight for a short time, you should see your heart rate again.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
GPS signal missing
Environmental factors including tall buildings, dense forest, steep hills, and thick
cloud cover can interfere with your watch's ability to connect to GPS satellites. If
your watch is searching for a GPS signal during an exercise, you’ll see “
GPS connecting ” appear at the top of the screen. If Versa 3 can't connect to a
64
GPS satellite, the watch stops trying to connect until the next time you start a
GPS exercise.
For best results, wait for Versa 3 to find the signal before you start your workout.
If Versa 3 loses the GPS signal during your workout, "GPS lost signal" appears at the
top of the screen. Your watch will attempt to reconnect.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Can't connect to Wi-Fi
If Versa 3 can't connect to Wi-Fi, you might have entered an incorrect password, or
the password might have changed:
1. From the Today tab in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture > Versa 3
tile.
2. Tap Wi-Fi Settings > Next.
3. Tap the network you want to use > Remove.
65
4. Tap Add Network and follow the on-screen instructions to reconnect the Wi-
Fi network.
To check if your Wi-Fi network is working correctly, connect another device to your
network; if it connects successfully, try again to connect your watch.
If Versa 3 still won't connect to Wi-Fi, make sure that you're attempting to connect
your watch to a compatible network. For best results, use your home Wi-Fi
network. Versa 3 can't connect to 5GHz Wi-Fi, WPA enterprise, or public networks
that require logins, subscriptions, or profiles. For a list of compatible network types,
see "Connect to Wi-Fi" on page 9.
After you verify the network is compatible, restart your watch and try connecting
to Wi-Fi again. If you see other networks appear in the list of available networks, but
not your preferred network, move your watch closer to your router.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
Other issues
If you experience any of the following issues, restart your watch:
l Won't sync
l Won't respond to taps, swipes, or button press
l Won't track steps or other data
l Won't show notifications
For instructions, see "Restart Versa 3" on page 62.
For more information, see help.fitbit.com.
66
General Info and Specifications
Sensors and Components
Fitbit Versa 3 contains the following sensors and motors:
l 3-axis accelerometer, which tracks motion patterns
l Altimeter, which tracks altitude changes
l Built-in GPS receiver + GLONASS, which tracks your location during a workout
l Optical heart-rate tracker
l Device temperature sensor (skin temperature variation available through
Premium only)
l Ambient light sensor
l Microphone
l Speaker
l Vibration motor
Materials
The band that comes with Versa 3 is made of a flexible, durable elastomer material
similar to that used in many sports watches.
The housing and buckle on Versa 3 are made of anodized aluminum. While
anodized aluminum can contain traces of nickel, which can cause an allergic reaction
in someone with nickel sensitivity, the amount of nickel in all Fitbit products meets
the European Union's stringent Nickel Directive.
Our products may contain trace amounts of acrylates and methacrylates from
adhesives used in those products but we work to ensure our products adhere to
rigorous design specifications and meet extensive test requirements so as to
minimum the potential for reaction to these adhesives.
67
Wireless technology
Versa 3 contains a Bluetooth 5.0 radio transceiver, Wi-Fi chip, and NFC chip.
Haptic feedback
Versa 3 contains a vibration motor for alarms, goals, notifications, reminders, and
apps.
Battery
Versa 3 contains a rechargeable lithium-polymer battery.
Memory
Versa 3 stores your data, including daily stats, sleep information, and exercise
history, for 7 days. See your historical data in the Fitbit app.
Display
Versa 3 has a color AMOLED display.
Band size
Band sizes are shown below. Note that accessory bands sold separately may vary
slightly.
Small band Fits a wrist between 5.5 - 7.1 inches (140 mm - 180 mm) in circumference
Large band Fits a wrist between 7.1 - 8.7 inches (180 mm - 220 mm) in circumference
68
Environmental conditions
Operating temperature 14° to 113° F
(-10° to 45° C)
Non-operating temperature -4° to 14° F
(-20° to -10° C)
113° to 140°F
(45° to 60° C)
Charging temperature 32° to 95° F
(0° to 35° C)
Water resistance Water resistant up to 50 meters
Maximum operating altitude 28,000 feet
(8,534 m)
Learn more
To learn more about your watch, how to track your progress in the Fitbit app, and
how to build healthy habits with Fitbit Premium, visit help.fitbit.com.
Return policy and warranty
Find warranty information and the fitbit.com return policy on our website.
69
Regulatory and Safety Notices
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for certain regions can also be viewed on
your device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
USA: Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
statement
Model FB511
FCC ID: XRAFB511
Notice to the User: The FCC ID can also be viewed on your device. To view the
content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
Supplier's Declaration of Conformity
Unique Identifier: FB511
Responsible Party – U.S. Contact Information
199 Fremont Street, 14th Floor
San Francisco, CA
94105
United States
877-623-4997
FCC Compliance Statement (for products subject to Part 15)
This device complies with Part 15 of the FCC Rules.
Operation is subject to the following two conditions:
70
1. This device may not cause harmful interference and
2. This device must accept any interference, including interference that may
cause undesired operation of the device.
FCC Warning
Changes or modifications not expressly approved by the party responsible for
compliance could void the user’s authority to operate the equipment.
Note: This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a
Class B digital device, pursuant to part 15 of the FCC Rules. These limits are
designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful interference in a
residential installation. This equipment generates, uses and can radiate radio
frequency energy and, if not installed and used in accordance with the instructions,
may cause harmful interference to radio communications. However, there is no
guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular installation. If this
equipment does cause harmful interference to radio or television reception, which
can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to
try to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures:
l Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
l Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver.
l Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to which
the receiver is connected.
l Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help.
This device meets the FCC and IC requirements for RF exposure in public or
uncontrolled environments.
Canada: Industry Canada (IC) statement
Model/Modèle FB511
IC: 8542A-FB511
Notice to the User: The IC ID can also be viewed on your device. To view the
content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
71
Avis à l'utilisateur: L'ID de l'IC peut également être consulté sur votre appareil.
Pour voir le contenu:
Paramètres > À propos de Versa 3 > Mentions légales
This device meets the IC requirements for RF exposure in public or uncontrolled
environments.
Cet appareil est conforme aux conditions de la IC en matière de RF dans des
environnements publics ou incontrôlée
IC Notice to Users English/French in accordance with current issue of RSS GEN:
This device complies with Industry Canada license exempt RSS standard(s).
Operation is subject to the following two conditions:
1. this device may not cause interference, and
2. this device must accept any interference, including interference that may
cause undesired operation of the device.
Cet appareil est conforme avec Industrie Canada RSS standard exempts de licence
(s). Son utilisation est soumise à Les deux conditions suivantes:
1. cet appareil ne peut pas provoquer d’interférences et
2. cet appareil doit accepter Toute interférence, y compris les interférences qui
peuvent causer un mauvais fonctionnement du dispositif
European Union (EU)
Simplified EU Declaration of Conformity
Hereby, Fitbit, Inc. declares that the radio equipment type Model FB511 is in
compliance with Directive 2014/53/EU. The full text of the EU declaration of
conformity is available at the following internet address: www.fitbit.com/safety
Vereinfachte EU-Konformitätserklärung
72
Fitbit, Inc. erklärt hiermit, dass die Funkgerättypen Modell FB511 die Richtlinie
2014/53/EU erfüllen. Der vollständige Wortlaut der EU-Konformitätserklärungen
kann unter folgender Internetadresse abgerufen werden: www.fitbit.com/safety
Declaración UE de Conformidad simplificada
Por la presente, Fitbit, Inc. declara que el tipo de dispositivo de radio Modelo FB511
cumple con la Directiva 2014/53/UE. El texto completo de la declaración de
conformidad de la UE está disponible en la siguiente dirección de Internet:
www.fitbit.com/safety
Déclaration UE de conformité simplifiée
Fitbit, Inc. déclare par la présente que les modèles d’appareils radio FB511 sont
conformes à la Directive 2014/53/UE. Les déclarations UE de conformité sont
disponibles dans leur intégralité sur le site suivant : www.fitbit.com/safety
Dichiarazione di conformità UE semplificata
Fitbit, Inc. dichiara che il tipo di apparecchiatura radio Modello FB511 è conforme
alla Direttiva 2014/53/UE. Il testo completo della dichiarazione di conformità UE è
disponibile al seguente indirizzo Internet: www.fitbit.com/safety
IP Rating
Model FB511 has a water resistance rating of IPX8 under IEC standard 60529, up to a
depth of 50 meters.
Model FB511 has a dust ingress rating of IP6X under IEC standard 60529 which
indicates the device is dust-tight.
Please refer to the beginning of this section for instructions on how to access your
product’s IP rating.
73
Argentina
C-25002
Australia and New Zealand
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
Belarus
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
74
Botswana
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory Info
China
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory Info
75
China RoHS
部件名称
Part Name
有毒和危险品
Toxic and Hazardous Substances or Elements
Model FB511 铅
(Pb)
水银
(Hg)
镉
(Cd)
六价铬
(Cr(VI))
多溴化苯
(PBB)
多溴化二苯
醚
(PBDE)
表带和表扣
(Strap and
Buckle)
O O O O O O
电子
(Electronics) -- O O O O O
电池
(Battery) O O O O O O
充电线
(Charging
Cable)
O O O O O O
本表格依据 SJ/T 11364 的规定编制
O = 表示该有害物质在该部件所有均质材料中的含量均在 GB/T 26572规定的限量要求以下
(indicates that the content of the toxic and hazardous substance in all the
Homogeneous Materials of the part is below the concentration limit requirement as
described in GB/T 26572).
X = 表示该有害物质至少在该部件的某一均质材料中的含量超出 GB/T 26572规定的限量要
求 (indicates that the content of the toxic and hazardous substance in at least
one Homogeneous Material of the part exceeds the concentration limit requirement
as described in GB/T 26572).
CMIIT ID 2020DJ7882
76
Frequency band: 2400-2483.5 MHz NFC: 13.56MHz
Transmitted power: Max EIRP, 14.4dBm
Occupied bandwidth: BLE: BLE: 2MHz, BT: 1MHz, NFC: 2.3 kHz, WiFi:
20MHz
Modulation system: BLE: GFSK, BT: GFSK (BDR), n/4-DQPSK (EDR),
8PSK (EDR), NFC: ASK, WiFi: DSSS, OFDM
CMIIT ID displayed: On packaging
Customs Union
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
Indonesia
69814/SDPPI/2020
3788
Israel
מספראישוראלחוטישלמשרדהתקשורתהוא.74746-51
אסורלהחליףאתהאנטנההמקוריתשלהמכשירולאלעשותבוכלשינויטכניאחר
Japan
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
77
201-200606
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
Mexico
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
La operación de este equipo está sujeta a las siguientes dos condiciones:
1. Es posible que este equipo o dispositivo no cause interferencia perjudicial y
2. Este equipo o dispositivo debe aceptar cualquier interferencia, incluyendo la
que pueda causar su operación no deseada
Moldova
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
78
Morocco
AGREE PAR L’ANRT MAROC
Numéro d’agrément: MR00025102ANRT2020
Date d’agrément: 02/08/2020
Nigeria
Connection and use of this communications equipment is permitted by the Nigerian
Communications Commission.
Oman
TRA/TA-R/9745/20
D090258
Pakistan
PTA Approved
Model No.: FB511
TAC No.: 9.687/2020
Device Type: Smart Watch
79
Philippines
Type Accepted
No: ESD-RCE-2023407
Serbia
Singapore
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
South Korea
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
80
본 제품의 전자파흡수율은 과학기술정보통신부의「전자파 인체보호기준」을 만족합니
다.
본 제품은 국립전파연구원의「전자파흡수율 측정기준」에 따라 최대출력 조건에서 머리
에 근접하여 시험되었으며, 최대 전자파흡수율 측정값은 다음과같습니다.
모델명 (Model) 머리 전자파흡수율 (Head SAR)
FB511 0.089 W/kg
클래스 B 장치 (가정 사용을위한 방송 통신 기기) : EMC 등록 주로 가정용 (B 급)으로하고, 모
든 지역에서 사용할 수 있습니다 얻을이 장치.
Translation:
Class B devices (broadcast communications equipment for home use): EMC
registration is mainly for household use (B class) and can be used in all areas get this
device.
81
Taiwan
用戶注意：某些地區的法規內容也可以在您的設備上查看。要查看內容：
設定 > 關於 Versa 3 > 法規資訊
Translation:
Notice to the User: Regulatory content can also be viewed on your device.
Instructions to view content from your menu:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
低功率警語:
l 取得審驗證明之低功率射頻器材，非經核准，公司、商號或使用者均不得擅自變更
頻率、加大功率或變更原設計之特性及功能。
l 低功率射頻器材之使用不得影響飛航安全及干擾合法通信；經發現有干擾現象時，
應立即停用，並改善至無干擾時方得繼續使用。前述合法通信，指依電信管理法規
定作業之無線電通信。低功率射頻器材須忍受合法通信或工業、科學及醫療用電波
輻射性電機設備之干擾。
Translation:
Warning Statement for Low Power Radios:
l Without permission granted by the NCC, no company, enterprise, or user is
allowed to change the frequency of an approved low power radio-frequency
device, enhance its transmitting power or alter original characteristics or
performance.
l The use of low power RF devices must not affect flight safety or interfere with
legal communications: when interference is found, it should be immediately
stopped and ameliorated not to interfere before continuing to use it. The legal
communications mentioned here refer to radio communications operating in
accordance with the provisions of the Telecommunication Law. Low power RF
devices need to bear with interference from legal communications or
industrial, scientific and medical radio wave radiating equipment
電池警語：
82
此裝置使用鋰電池。
若未遵照下列準則，則裝置內的鋰離子電池壽命可能會縮短或有損壞裝置、發生火災、化學
品灼傷、電解液洩漏及／或受傷的風險。
l 請勿拆解、鑿孔或損壞裝置或電池。
l 請勿取出或嘗試取出使用者不可自行更換的電池。
l 請勿將電池曝露於火焰、爆炸或其他危險中。
l 請勿使用尖銳物品取出電池。
Translation:
Battery warning:
This device uses a lithium-ion battery.
If the following guidelines are not followed, the life of the lithium-ion battery in the
device may be shortened or there is a risk of damage to the device, fire, chemical
burn, electrolyte leakage and / or injury..
l Do not disassemble, puncture or damage the device or battery.
l Do not remove or try to remove the battery that the user cannot replace.
l Do not expose the battery to flames, explosions or other hazards.
l Do not use sharp objects to remove the battery.
Vision Warning
使用過度恐傷害視力
警語
• 使用過度恐傷害視力
注意事項
• 使用30分鐘請休息10分鐘。未滿2歲幼兒不看螢幕，2歲以上每天看螢幕不要超過1
小時
Translation:
Excessive use may damage vision
83
Warning:
l Excessive use may damage vision
Attention:
l Rest for 10 minutes after every 30 minutes.
l Children under 2 years old should stay away from this product. Children 2
years old or more should not see the screen for more than 1 hour a day.
Taiwan RoHS
United Arab Emirates
Notice to the User: Regulatory content for this region can also be viewed on your
device. To view the content:
Settings > About Versa 3 > Regulatory info
84
TRA – United Arab Emirates
Dealer ID: DA35294/14
TA RTTE: ER88790/ 20
Model: FB511
Type: Smartwatch
Vietnam
Zambia
ZMB / ZICTA / TA / 2020 / 9 / 78
Safety Statement
This equipment has been tested to comply with safety certification in accordance
with the specifications of EN Standard: EN60950-1:2006 + A11:2009 + A1:2010 +
A12:2011 + A2:2013 & EN62368-1:2014 + A11:2017.
85
©2020 Fitbit, Inc. All rights reserved. Fitbit and the Fitbit logo are trademarks
or registered trademarks of Fitbit in the US and other countries. A more
complete list of Fitbit trademarks can be found at
http://www.fitbit.com/legal/trademark-list. Third-party trademarks
mentioned are the property of their respective owners.