Smoking is the leading cause of premature, preventable death in this country. Cigarette smoking and exposure to tobacco smoke cause about 480,000 premature deaths each year in the United States (1). Of those premature deaths, about 36% are from cancer, 39% are from heart disease and stroke, and 24% are from lung disease (1). Mortality rates among smokers are about three times higher than among people who have never smoked (6, 7).
 

 Smoking harms nearly every bodily organ and organ system in the body and diminishes a person’s overall health. Smoking causes cancers of the lung, esophagus, larynx, mouth, throat, kidney, bladder, liver, pancreas, stomach, cervix, colon, and rectum, as well as acute myeloid leukemia (1–3).
 

 Smoking also causes heart disease, stroke, aortic aneurysm (a balloon-like bulge in an artery in the chest), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (chronic bronchitis and emphysema), diabetes, osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, age-related macular degeneration, and cataracts, and worsens asthma symptoms in adults. Smokers are at higher risk of developing pneumonia, tuberculosis, and other airway infections (1–3). In addition, smoking causes inflammation and impairs immune function (1).
 

 Since the 1960s, a smoker’s risk of developing lung cancer or COPD has actually increased compared with nonsmokers, even though the number of cigarettes consumed per smoker has decreased (1). There have also been changes over time in the type of lung cancer smokers develop – a decline in squamous cell carcinomas but a dramatic increase in adenocarcinomas. Both of these shifts may be due to changes in cigarette design and composition, in how tobacco leaves are cured, and in how deeply smokers inhale cigarette smoke and the toxicants it contains (1, 8).
 

 Smoking makes it harder for a woman to get pregnant. A pregnant smoker is at higher risk of miscarriage, having an ectopic pregnancy, having her baby born too early and with an abnormally low birth weight, and having her baby born with a cleft lip and/or cleft palate (1). A woman who smokes during or after pregnancy increases her infant’s risk of death from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) (2, 3). Men who smoke are at greater risk of erectile dysfunction (1, 9).
 

 The longer a smoker’s duration of smoking, the greater their likelihood of experiencing harm from smoking, including earlier death (7). But regardless of their age, smokers can substantially reduce their risk of disease, including cancer, by quitting.
 

 What are the risks of tobacco smoke to nonsmokers?
 

 Secondhand smoke (also called environmental tobacco smoke, involuntary smoking, and passive smoking) is the combination of “sidestream” smoke (the smoke given off by a burning tobacco product) and “mainstream” smoke (the smoke exhaled by a smoker) (4, 5, 10, 11).
 

 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. National Toxicology Program, the U.S. Surgeon General, and the International Agency for Research on Cancer have classified secondhand smoke as a known human carcinogen (cancer-causing agent) (5, 11, 12). Inhaling secondhand smoke causes lung cancer in nonsmoking adults (1, 2, 4). Approximately 7,300 lung cancer deaths occur each year among adult nonsmokers in the United States as a result of exposure to secondhand smoke (1). The U.S. Surgeon General estimates that living with a smoker increases a nonsmoker’s chances of developing lung cancer by 20 to 30% (4).
 

 Secondhand smoke causes disease and premature death in nonsmoking adults and children (2, 4). Exposure to secondhand smoke irritates the airways and has immediate harmful effects on a person’s heart and blood vessels. It increases the risk of heart disease by an estimated 25 to 30% (4). In the United States, exposure to secondhand smoke is estimated to cause about 34,000 deaths from heart disease each year (1). Exposure to secondhand smoke also increases the risk of stroke by 20 to 30% (1). Pregnant women exposed to secondhand smoke are at increased risk of having a baby with a small reduction in birth weight (1).  
 

 Children exposed to secondhand smoke are at an increased risk of SIDS, ear infections, colds, pneumonia, and bronchitis. Secondhand smoke exposure can also increase the frequency and severity of asthma symptoms among children who have asthma. Being exposed to secondhand smoke slows the growth of children’s lungs and can cause them to cough, wheeze, and feel breathless (2, 4).
 

 Is smoking addictive?
 

 Smoking is highly addictive. Nicotine is the drug primarily responsible for a person’s addiction to tobacco products, including cigarettes. The addiction to cigarettes and other tobacco products that nicotine causes is similar to the addiction produced by using drugs such as heroin and cocaine (13). Nicotine is present naturally in the tobacco plant. But tobacco companies intentionally design cigarettes to have enough nicotine to create and sustain addiction. 
 

 The amount of nicotine that gets into the body is determined by the way a person smokes a tobacco product and by the nicotine content and design of the product. Nicotine is absorbed into the bloodstream through the lining of the mouth and the lungs and travels to the brain in a matter of seconds. Taking more frequent and deeper puffs of tobacco smoke increases the amount of nicotine absorbed by the body.
 

 Are other tobacco products, such as smokeless tobacco or pipe tobacco, harmful and addictive?
 

 Yes. All forms of tobacco are harmful and addictive (4, 11). There is no safe tobacco product.
 

 In addition to cigarettes, other forms of tobacco include smokeless tobacco, cigars, pipes, hookahs (waterpipes), bidis, and kreteks. 
 

 

 There is no safe level of smoking. Smoking even just one cigarette per day over a lifetime can cause smoking-related cancers (lung, bladder, and pancreas) and premature death (24, 25).
 

 What are the immediate health benefits of quitting smoking?
 

 The immediate health benefits of quitting smoking are substantial:
 

 Heart rate and blood pressure, which are abnormally high while smoking, begin to return to normal.
 Within a few hours, the level of carbon monoxide in the blood begins to decline. (Carbon monoxide reduces the blood’s ability to carry oxygen.)
 Within a few weeks, people who quit smoking have improved circulation, produce less phlegm, and don’t cough or wheeze as often.
 Within several months of quitting, people can expect substantial improvements in lung function (26).
 Within a few years of quitting, people will have lower risks of cancer, heart disease, and other chronic diseases than if they had continued to smoke.