Introduction
 The Apgar score is based on five components (skin color, heart rate, reflex irritability, muscle tone, and respiration). Each item is scored from 0 to 2 with a total score of 7–10 as normal and the highest score of 10 representing the optimal condition. The Apgar score has been used worldwide as a vitality index for almost every newborn immediately after birth. 
 

 

 Methods
 Study Population
 We conducted a population-based cohort study using data from Danish national registers. A total of 2,272,473 live singletons were identified during 1978–2015 from the Danish Medical Birth Registry . We excluded 1,001 births with missing information on sex and 41,252 births with no valid information on 5-min Apgar scores (including the score of 0). We further excluded 16,398 infants who died or emigrated from Denmark before the age of 1 year. The final cohort comprised 2,213,822 births.
 

 

 Discussion
 Main Findings
 In this large population-based cohort study, during childhood, we found individuals with even clinically “normal” Apgar score range of 7–9 still had higher risks of overall mental disorders and some specific diagnoses: organic disorders and a series of neurodevelopmental disorders (intellectual disability, pervasive developmental disorders, childhood autism, and ADHD). It is also interesting to observe that compromised Apgar scores were at elevated risks of developing organic disorders and neurotic disorders, which were reported for the first time. During early adulthood, compromised 5-min Apgar scores were not found to be associated with mental disorders.
 

 Comparisons With Other Studies
 To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the association of the full spectrum of mental disorders with the 5-min Apgar score. Our findings indicate the strongest associations for intellectual disability in childhood, which corroborates the results from previous studies. Most previous studies were based on results of different non-standardized intelligence tests, and cross-sectional or descriptive designs, except a recent Swedish study, by virtue of clinically confirmed diagnosis and cohort design, reporting that term infants with low 5-min Apgar score had a higher risk of severe neurologic morbidity, including a 9-fold risk of intellectual disability. However, the Swedish study only captured cases before 14 years of age and only adjusted for year of birth, maternal age, parity, and smoking. Similarly, we observed 3~5-fold risks of intellectual disability in childhood (until 18 years of age), and we were able to adjust for not only the aforementioned confounders but also parental psychiatric history and socioeconomic status, indicating a more robust association. In addition, ADHD and autism were another two widely studied neurodevelopment disorders in relation to Apgar score during childhood, but existing results were inconsistent, which may be due to heterogeneity of methodology, in particular categorizations of Apgar scores and definition of outcomes. For example, some studies used pervasive developmental disorder (ICD-10 codes: F84) as a proxy to define autism, which includes but is not limited to autism. To reduce the possibility of misclassification, we only focused on childhood autism–the typical and most severe type of autism–to explore the association. Our findings further support that compromised 5-min Apgar scores were associated with childhood autism.
 

 Furthermore, we observed that individuals with a compromised 5-min Apgar score had higher risks of organic disorder and neurotic disorder during childhood, which have not been reported previously. These findings imply that less-than-optimal Apgar scores at birth may be an indicator for a broad scope of mental disorders in childhood, not merely neurodevelopmental disorders.
 

 There have been scarce studies examining the association between low Apgar score and adulthood mental health. We did not find that compromised 5-min Apgar scores were associated with mental disorders during early adulthood, which may be attributed to incomplete records of Apgar scores during the initial establishment of the Danish Medical Birth Register (MBR). We observed that participants with suboptimal Apgar scores at 5 min tended to have higher risks of organic disorders, schizophrenia, neurotic disorders, and personality disorders, and the low statistical precisions may probably be due to limited cases in the low Apgar score groups. Considering that the maximum attained age in our study was only up to 39 years, the follow-up between 19 and 39 years was not long enough to detect some late-onset mental disorders (e.g., dementia), therefore, future studies with extended follow-up to late adulthood are warranted.
 

 Current guidelines recommend Apgar scores of 7 or higher to be reassuring, hence, infants with these scores are often assumed to constitute a homogeneous group. Nevertheless, recent studies showed that even reassuring Apgar scores of 7–9 are associated with higher risks of neonatal mortality, neonatal morbidity, and adverse long-term neurological outcomes, compared with an Apgar score of 10. We found a dose-response increasing the overall risk of mental disorders with decreasing Apgar score of 9 toward 7. Furthermore, individuals with “normal” scores of 7–9 carried increased risks of a wide range of neurodevelopmental disorders, such as intellectual disability, pervasive developmental disorders, childhood autism, and ADHD. Similarly, prior studies based on developmental screening scales found children aged 5 years with 5-min Apgar scores of 7–9 were more vulnerable on the emotional or physical health domain of the Early Development Instrument. Recently, a large transnational study also suggested that low Apgar scores of 7–9 were associated with a higher risk of autistic disorder but without controlling for socioeconomic status and paternal psychiatric history. Our findings are in line with those of previous studies by showing that reassuring Apgar scores 7–9 are associated with various neurodevelopmental disorders in childhood. These findings support that 5-min Apgar scores routinely available in contemporary neonatal settings, even within the normal range 7–9, are not totally reassuring.
 

 The causes of mental disorders are multifactorial. Adverse prenatal events (e.g., gestational diabetes mellitus, preterm, and restricted fetal growth) are important risk factors and could have a programming effect on fetal brain development, resulting in increased risk for psychopathology later in life. In this study, adjusting for gestational age at birth and fetal growth status did not substantially change the risks, indicating that preterm birth or restricted fetal growth do not strongly modify the relations between low Apgar scores at birth and subsequent mental disorders. Although Apgar scores are not clear on any causal pathway of pathogenesis, less-than-optimal Apgar scores at birth may be a potential sign of the cumulative effect of those adverse prenatal events. Especially, the clinically reassuring but suboptimal score range 7–9 may indicate subtle but still detrimental intrauterine insults which will act negatively on fetal brain development. In clinical settings, a distressed infant will receive resuscitation well before the 5-min Apgar score is assigned, so the score 7–9 could not well reflect severe conditions prior to the assessment. That may be one of the reasons we observed exposure to the scores 7–9 was associated with an increased risk of mental disorders. In this study, a novel finding that a compromised 5-min Apgar score was linked to increased risks of organic disorder and neurotic disorder was reported. Organic disorder comprises a range of mental disorders based on a demonstrable etiology in cerebral disease, brain injury, or other insults leading to cerebral dysfunction. Increased risk of organic disorder with low Apgar score implies adverse prenatal insults (e.g., hypoxia-ischemia, white matter injury, reduced blood flow, malnutrition) exert a long-lasting impact on brain function in later life. With regard to neurotic disorder, its prevalence is relevant to low levels of socioeconomic status (SES). In this study, we found individuals with compromised Apgar scores tended to be born in families with worse SES (e.g., mothers live alone and have a low education level). It is, therefore, possible that SES factors at least partially mediate the observed association between compromised Apgar scores and neurotic disorder.