instructions
• Warnings and Important Safety Instructions in this manual
do not cover all possible conditions and situations that
may occur.
It is your responsibility to use common sense, caution,
and care when installing, maintaining, and operating your
appliance.
• Because these following operating instructions cover
various models, the characteristics of your refrigerator
may differ slightly from those described in this manual and
not all warning signs may be applicable. If you have any
questions or concerns, contact your nearest service center
or find help and information online at www.samsung.com.
• R-600a or R-134a is used as a refrigerant. Check the
compressor label on the rear of the appliance or the rating
label inside the fridge to see which refrigerant is used for
your appliance. When this product contains flammable gas
(Refrigerant R-600a), contact your local authority in regard
to safe disposal of this product.
• In order to avoid the creation of a flammable gas-air
mixture if a leak in the refrigerating circuit occurs, the size
of the room in which the appliance may be sited depends
on the amount of refrigerant used.
Safety information Untitled-1 4 2022-03-25 6:06:25
English 5
Safety information
• Never start up an appliance showing any signs of damage.
If in doubt, consult your dealer. The room must be 1 m3
in size for every 8 g of R-600a refrigerant inside the
appliance.
The amount of refrigerant in your particular appliance is
shown on the identification plate inside the appliance.
• Refrigerant squirting out of the pipes could ignite or cause
an eye injury. When refrigerant leaks from the pipe, avoid
any naked flames and move anything flammable away
from the product and ventilate the room immediately.
- Failing to do so may result in fire or explosion.
• To avoid contamination of food, please respect the
following instructions:
- Opening the door for long periods can cause a
significant increase of the temperature in the
compartments of the appliance.
- Clean regularly surfaces that can come in contact with
food and accessible drainage systems.
- Clean water tanks if they have not been used for 48 h;
flush the water system connected to a water supply if
water has not been drawn for 5 days.
- Store raw meat and fish in suitable containers in the
refrigerator, so that it is not in contact with or drip onto
other food.
- Two-star frozen-food compartments are suitable for
storing pre-frozen food, storing or making icecream and
making ice cubes.
- One-, two- and three-star compartments are not suitable
for the freezing of fresh food.
Untitled-1 5 2022-03-25 6:06:25
Safety information
6 English
Safety information
- If the refrigerating appliance is left empty for long
periods, switch off, defrost, clean, dry, and leave the
door open to prevent mould developing within the
appliance.
Important safety symbols and precautions:
Please follow all safety instructions in this manual. This
manual uses the following safety symbols.
WARNING
Hazards or unsafe practices that may result in severe personal
injury, property damage, and/or death.
CAUTION
Hazards or unsafe practices that may result in severe personal
injury and/or property damage.
NOTE
Useful information that helps users understand or benefit
from the refrigerator.
These warning signs are here to prevent injury to you and
others.
Please follow them carefully.
After reading this section, keep it in a safe place for future
reference.
Untitled-1 6 2022-03-25 6:06:25
English 7
Safety information
Important safety precautions
Warning; Risk of fire / flammable materials
WARNING
• When positioning the appliance, ensure the supply cord is
not trapped or damaged.
• Do not locate multiple portable socket-outlets or portable
power supplies at the rear of the appliance.
• Fill with potable water only.
• Connect to potable water supply only.
• Keep ventilation openings, in the appliance enclosure or in
the built-in structure, clear of obstruction.
• Do not use mechanical devices or any other means
to accelerate the defrosting process, other than those
recommended by the manufacturer.
• Do not damage the refrigerant circuit.
• Do not use electrical appliances inside the food storage
compartments of the appliance, unless they are of the type
recommended by the manufacturer.
• This appliance is not intended for use by persons
(including children) with reduced physical, sensory, or
mental capabilities, or those who lack experience and
knowledge, unless they have been given supervision or
instruction concerning the use of the appliance by a person
responsible for their safety