Simulations testing Celcomen’s identifiability guarantees
 Simulations were done in Python and completed by first generating a ground truth genegene interaction matrix. This was achieved by creating a n-genes by n-genes matrix of
 random values; for these experiments four genes were used. We then utilized Celcomen’s
 generative module, Simcomen, to learn a spatially-resolved counts matrix reflective of the
 ground truth gene-gene interaction matrix. Comparisons to the randomly initialized count
 matrix are termed “Raw input” and those to the learned count matrix are termed “SCC
 output”. To interrogate for self-consistency, we initialized Celcomen’s inference module
 with a random gene-gene interaction matrix and asked it to utilize the learned count matrix
 from Simcomen to decipher the ground truth gene-gene interaction matrix. Comparisons
 to the Celcomen outputted gene-gene interaction matrix are termed “CCC output”.
 Spearman correlation was used to compare the ground-truth gene-gene interaction
 values and the simulated-then-inferred gene-gene interaction values to test for model
 robustness and identifiability. For all exact parameter values utilized during the
 experiments, see the “analysis.simulations.ipynb” notebook in the reproducibility GitHub.
 Biological testing of Celcomen’s identifiability guarantees
 Biological confirmation of Celcomen’s identifiability guarantee was done by training two
 Celcomen inference module instances at the same time and comparing their derived
 gene-gene interaction results. The first model instance, which we call sample-specific,
 was trained only on one sample. The second model instance, which we call rest, was
 trained on the remaining samples. Thus, these two model instances are never trained on
 the same samples. Each model is trained to completion utilizing the same model
 hyperparameters, and their gene-gene interaction matrices are retrieved after the final
 epoch. We correlate a flattened version of their gene-gene interaction matrices using
 Spearman’s correlation due to the possible non-linear nature of the matrices’ values. We
 repeat this experiment for each of the samples in the fetal spleen dataset. The results
 across each sample’s experiments are aggregated together and compared in a bar plot.
 We derived a “random” control to compare to by shuffling the order of the flattened genegene interaction matrices and computing a correlation of the shuffled values. MannWhitney U test is used to derive p-values and all p-values are labeled on plot. For the full
 code utilized, see the “analysis.biological.ipynb” notebook in the reproducibility GitHub.
 Interferon knockout experiment on Xenium of human glioblastoma
 Processed Xenium data was subjected to the inference module of Celcomen, CCE, and
 then these gene-gene interaction values were annotated as containing cytoplasmic,
 surface membrane (plasma membrane GO ID via GO cellular component), or secreted
 (extracellular space GO ID also via GO cellular component) genes according to their GO
 IDs from QuickGO36. IFITM3 was knocked out in a randomly selected previously IFITM3
 positive cell. First neighbors were defined as less than 15 µm away and second neighbors
 were defined as less than 30 µm away. Changes in each gene’s expression in each cell
 were calculated and these changes in expression pre- and post- perturbation were
 compared between different specified cellular subsets. These are the differential genes
 later used for differential expression analysis and pathway enrichment. Gene set
 enrichment analysis (GSEA) in R (v4.1.2) was utilized to perform pathway enrichment
 analysis on differentially post-perturbation affected genes. The interferon signature was
 derived directly from tissue by computing the differentially expressed genes between
 interferon high and low cells and taking the top 25, excluding the perturbed IFITM3 as
 that would bias analyses. For the full model parameters and code utilized, see the
 “analysis.perturbation.ipynb” notebook in the reproducibility GitHub.
 Counterfactual prediction validation via in vivo perturbed lung tumors
 Spatial perturbation data was acquired from previously published Perturb-map
 technology, GSE19346027. Their processed spaceranger output and annotations were
 read in and wild-type (WT) lesions, as previously annotated, were identified and any spots
 that were within two degrees of a perturbation specific cluster were trimmed away; this
 was done via a <100 filter in spatial distance with the value of 100 visually acquired from
 a histogram of spot-spot spatial distances (i.e. distance of 100 was the second non-zero
 peak). Lesions were then fed into the Celcomen model to identify gene-gene relationships
 and the trained gene-gene interaction matrix was used by Simcomen for counterfactual
 predictions. In detail, each lesion was examined for Tgfbr2+ spots and had a random
 positive spot knocked out (KO) in terms of Tgfbr2 expression. Simcomen then utilized the
 learned gene-gene interaction matrix to predict the whole transcriptome of every spot post
 perturbation. We then compared the change in expression in the KO spot compared to
 WT spots. Spearman correlation was used to compare model Tgfbr2 KO versus WT gene
 rankings with those directly derived from experimental Tgfbr2 KO spots and WT, i.e. the
 published data includes an in vivo bona fide Tgfbr2 KO lesion and this was used as
 ground truth. We derived “random” controls for each lesion by computing correlations on
 shuffled gene rankings of the observed and predicted differentials between Tgfbr2 KO
 and WT. Mann-Whitney U test is used to derive p-value when comparing observed lesion
 derived gene rankings with those from random shufflings. For the full code utilized, see
 the “analysis.biological.ipynb” notebook in the reproducibility GitHub.