The Potential for Artificial Intelligence In Healthcare 

Artificial intelligence (AI) and related technologies are increasingly
prevalent in business and society, and are beginning to be applied
to healthcare. These technologies have the potential to transform
many aspects of patient care, as well as administrative processes
within provider, payer and pharmaceutical organizations.
 There are already a number of research studies suggesting that
AI can perform as well as or better than humans at key healthcare
tasks, such as diagnosing disease. Today, algorithms are already
outperforming radiologists at spotting malignant tumors, and
guiding researchers in how to construct cohorts for costly clinical
trials. However, for a variety of reasons, we believe that it will be
many years before AI replaces humans for broad medical process
domains. In this article, we describe both the potential that AI
offers to automate aspects of care and some of the barriers to
rapid implementation of AI in healthcare.
 Types of AI of relevance to healthcare
 Artificial intelligence is not one technology, but rather a collection
of them. Most of these technologies have immediate relevance
to the healthcare field, but the specific processes and tasks they support vary widely. 
Some particular AI technologies of high
importance to healthcare are defined and described below.
 Machine learning – neural networks and deep learning
 Machine learning is a statistical technique for fitting models
to data and to ‘learn’ by training models with data. Machine
learning is one of the most common forms of AI; in a 2018
Deloitte survey of 1,100 US managers whose organizations
were already pursuing AI, 63% of companies surveyed were
employing machine learning in their businesses. 1
 It is a broad
technique at the core of many approaches to AI and there are
many versions of it.
 In healthcare, the most common application of traditional
machine learning is precision medicine – predicting what
treatment protocols are likely to succeed on a patient based on
various patient attributes and the treatment context. 2
 The great
majority of machine learning and precision medicine applications
require a training dataset for which the outcome variable (eg onset
of disease) is known; this is called supervised learning.
 A more complex form of machine learning is the neural
network – a technology that has been available since the 1960s
has been well established in healthcare research for several
decades 3
 and has been used for categorisation applications like
determining whether a patient will acquire a particular disease.
It views problems in terms of inputs, outputs and weights of
variables or ‘features’ that associate inputs with outputs. It has
been likened to the way that neurons process signals, but the
analogy to the brain's function is relatively weak.
 The most complex forms of machine learning involve deep
learning, or neural network models with many levels of features
or variables that predict outcomes. There may be thousands
of hidden features in such models, which are uncovered by the
faster processing of today's graphics processing units and cloud
architectures. A common application of deep learning in healthcare
is recognition of potentially cancerous lesions in radiology images. 4
Deep learning is increasingly being applied to radiomics, or the
detection of clinically relevant features in imaging data beyond
what can be perceived by the human eye. 5
 Both radiomics and deep
learning are most commonly found in oncology-oriented image
analysis. Their combination appears to promise greater accuracy
in diagnosis than the previous generation of automated tools for
image analysis, known as computer-aided detection or CAD.
 Deep learning is also increasingly used for speech recognition
and, as such, is a form of natural language processing (NLP), described below. 
Unlike earlier forms of statistical analysis, each
feature in a deep learning model typically has little meaning to
a human observer. As a result, the explanation of the model's
outcomes may be very difficult or impossible to interpret. 
 Diagnosis and treatment applications
 Diagnosis and treatment of disease has been a focus of AI since
at least the 1970s, when MYCIN was developed at Stanford for
diagnosing blood-borne bacterial infections. 8
 This and other early
rule-based systems showed promise for accurately diagnosing and
treating disease, but were not adopted for clinical practice. They
were not substantially better than human diagnosticians, and they
were poorly integrated with clinician workflows and medical record
systems.
 More recently, IBM's Watson has received considerable attention
in the media for its focus on precision medicine, particularly cancer
diagnosis and treatment. Watson employs a combination of
machine learning and NLP capabilities. However, early enthusiasm
for this application of the technology has faded as customers
realized the difficulty of teaching Watson how to address
particular types of cancer 9
 and of integrating Watson into care
processes and systems. 10 Watson is not a single product but a set
of ‘cognitive services’ provided through application programming
interfaces (APIs), including speech and language, vision, and
machine learning-based data-analysis programs. Most observers
feel that the Watson APIs are technically capable, but taking on
cancer treatment was an overly ambitious objective. Watson and
other proprietary programs have also suffered from competition
with free ‘open source’ programs provided by some vendors, such
as Google's TensorFlow.
 Implementation issues with AI bedevil many healthcare
organizations. Although rule-based systems are incorporated within
EHR systems are widely used, including at the NHS, 11 they lack the
precision of more algorithmic systems based on machine learning.
These rule-based clinical decision support systems are difficult to
maintain as medical knowledge changes and are often not able to
handle the explosion of data and knowledge based on genomic,
proteomic, metabolic and other ‘omic-based’ approaches to care.
 This situation is beginning to change, but it is mostly present
in research labs and in tech firms, rather than in clinical practice.
Scarcely a week goes by without a research lab claiming that it
has developed an approach to using AI or big data to diagnose and treat a disease with equal or greater accuracy than human
clinicians. Many of these findings are based on radiological image
analysis, 12 though some involve other types of images such as
retinal scanning 13 or genomic-based precision medicine. 14 Since
these types of findings are based on statistically-based machine
learning models, they are ushering in an era of evidence- and
probability-based medicine, which is generally regarded as positive
but brings with it many challenges in medical ethics and patient/
clinician relationships. 15
 Tech firms and startups are also working assiduously on the
same issues. Google, for example, is collaborating with health
delivery networks to build prediction models from big data to warn
clinicians of high-risk conditions, such as sepsis and heart failure. 16
Google, Enlitic and a variety of other startups are developing
AI-derived image interpretation algorithms. Jvion offers a ‘clinical
success machine’ that identifies the patients most at risk as well as
those most likely to respond to treatment protocols. Each of these
could provide decision support to clinicians seeking to find the best
diagnosis and treatment for patients.
 There are also several firms that focus specifically on diagnosis
and treatment recommendations for certain cancers based on
their genetic profiles. Since many cancers have a genetic basis,
human clinicians have found it increasingly complex to understand
all genetic variants of cancer and their response to new drugs and
protocols. Firms like Foundation Medicine and Flatiron Health,
both now owned by Roche, specialise in this approach.
 Both providers and payers for care are also using ‘population
health’ machine learning models to predict populations at risk
of particular diseases 17 or accidents 18 or to predict hospital
readmission. 19 These models can be effective at prediction,
although they sometimes lack all the relevant data that might add
predictive capability, such as patient socio-economic status.
 But whether rules-based or algorithmic in nature, AI-based
diagnosis and treatment recommendations are sometimes
challenging to embed in clinical workflows and EHR systems. Such
integration issues have probably been a greater barrier to broad
implementation of AI than any inability to provide accurate and
effective recommendations; and many AI-based capabilities
for diagnosis and treatment from tech firms are standalone in
nature or address only a single aspect of care. Some EHR vendors
have begun to embed limited AI functions (beyond rule-based
clinical decision support) into their offerings, 20 but these are in the
early stages. Providers will either have to undertake substantial
integration projects themselves or wait until EHR vendors add
more AI capabilities.

 