WHO achievements: A mixed track record
Fighting infectious diseases
One of the WHO's biggest achievements was in eradicating smallpox: in 1980, 21 years after
launching an international vaccination campaign, it was finally able to declare the world free of the
disease. In 1988, the WHO declared a target of similarly eliminating polio by the end of the
millennium. That target was missed, and the stubborn persistence of infections prompted the WHO
to declare a PHEIC in 2014. Nevertheless, considerable progress has been made, with the number of
cases falling by 99 % over the past three decades. Unfortunately, tuberculosis is very far from
disappearing; however, the WHO's Global Drug Facility has enabled millions of patients in
developing countries to access high-quality anti-TB medicines, both through collective purchasing
mechanisms that bring the cost of drugs down, and through grants that help the poorest countries
to buy such medicines. The WHO has also been praised for its leadership during the 2003 SARS
epidemic; within just four months, the disease had been contained.
In 2009, fears that the swine flu virus could mutate into a more lethal form prompted the WHO to
declare its first ever Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC – see Box).
Governments rushed to stockpile vaccines, most of which were never used, as the epidemic turned
out to be milder than expected. This 'disproportionate' response, as it was described in a 2011
European Parliament resolution, was blamed for wasting millions of euros of public money on
unnecessary vaccines. Some critics even alleged that WHO decisions had been swayed by the
interests of the pharmaceutical sector. An internal enquiry exonerated the WHO from most of these
accusations, arguing that, in view of the evidence available at the time, it would not have been
possible to predict the course of the epidemic, while also acknowledging that the situation could
have been handled more transparently.
Whereas the WHO was accused of over-reacting to swine flu, its response to the 2014 West African
Ebola outbreak came too late to prevent tens of thousands of deaths. In what international health
experts described as an 'egregious failure', the WHO waited months before declaring a PHEIC,
despite warnings, including from its own staff, that the epidemic was out of control. The
organisation's lumbering bureaucratic response contrasted unfavourably with more agile
interventions by non-governmental bodies such as Médecins Sans Frontières. On the other hand, in
2018 efforts to contain a second outbreak of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were
more successful, with just 33 deaths in total; for some observers, the organisation's quick response,
which included the release of emergency funding just hours after the start of the outbreak and a
personal visit to Kinshasa by Director-General Tedros a few days later, suggested that it had learned
lessons from its 2014 failures. Ebola remains a serious threat in West Africa; a subsequent outbreak
triggered another PHEIC, and killed over 2 000.
Non-communicable diseases and other health threats
While media attention tends to focus on emergencies caused by infectious diseases, noncommunicable diseases such as cancer cost far more lives. However, the WHO's track record in this
respect is, again, a mixed one. For example, many recommendations issued by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer, a semi-autonomous branch of the WHO, are scientifically sound;
however, critics allege that the body does not do enough to prevent conflicts of interest that might
influence expert assessments on which its recommendations are based, nor is it very successful at
communicating its conclusions with the public.
On smoking, described by the WHO as a 'global epidemic', the main instrument is the 2003
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, the first ever international treaty adopted within the
WHO framework. The measures it envisages have played a key role in shaping national tobacco
control policies, including in developing countries. Implementation is still patchy, but gradually
improving: as of 2018, 12 % of the 181 countries which are parties to the Convention were failing to
ensure protection from passive smoking (e.g. bans on smoking in public places), 23 % were not
applying packaging and labelling requirements (such as health warnings on cigarette packets), 29 %
did not have awareness-raising and educational measures in place, while 30 % were not restricting
tobacco sales to and by minors. Tobacco still kills over 8 million people every year, most of them in
developing countries, and consumption is only declining slowly.
Obesity is another global health scourge that the WHO has taken on. For example, in 2016 it
endorsed taxes on soft drinks as an effective means of reducing sugar consumption. However, it has
run into resistance from the beverages industry, and the US government, which in 2018 blocked a
WHO panel from issuing a global recommendation on sugar taxes.
In developing countries, the high cost of medicines is often a barrier to effective treatment.
Improving access to medicines has long been a priority for the WHO. The interests of producers,
which are protected by patents, have to be balanced against patients' need for affordable treatment.
However, WHO work in this area has been blocked by disagreements between countries which
argue that intellectual property is not part of the organisation's remit – typically pharmaceutical
exporters, such as the United States (US) – and others, including developing countries, which feel
that it should be.