MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
Introduction 
The quality and timeliness of financial reporting in the Federal Government has come a long way since the first Governmentwide report subject to audit issued in March 1998 for fiscal year 1997. At that time, only 8 of the 24 Chief Financial Officers Act (CFO Act) agencies received clean opinions on their 1997 financial statements. This year, 20 of the 24 agencies received clean opinions and 21 of the 32 entities, most significant to these statements, had audited financial statements issued by the end of the calendar year. This improvement in both quality and timeliness was concurrent with the application of new accounting principles and new accounting systems, and involved performing reconciliations that had never been attempted before. This has been a monumental effort requiring years of planning and preparation and the efforts of thousands. However, we still have much to accomplish before we meet our objective of timely, useful financial reporting. 
The accompanying 2003 Financial Report of the United States Government is required by 31 U.S.C. § 331(e)(1) to be submitted to Congress by March 31, and consists of Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A), Statements of Net Cost, Statements of Operations and Changes in Net Position, Reconciliations of Net Operating Cost and Unified Budget Deficit, Statements of Changes in Cash Balance from Unified Budget and Other Activities, Balance Sheets, Stewardship Information (Unaudited), Notes to the Financial Statements, and Supplemental Information (Unaudited). Each section is preceded by a description of its contents.  
Executive Summary 
Purpose 
This Financial Report of the United States Government is prepared to give the President, Congress, and the American people information about the financial position of the Federal Government. This report provides, on an accrual basis of accounting, a broad, comprehensive view of the Federal Government’s finances that is not available elsewhere. It states the Government’s financial position and condition, its revenues and costs, assets and liabilities, and other obligations and commitments. It also discusses important financial issues and significant conditions that may affect future operations.  
Operating Results 
Revenues were down by $81.7 billion primarily due to lower tax collections and costs were up by $225.8 billion due to, among other things, fighting the global war on terrorism. This resulted in a net operating cost of $665.0 billion. This compares with the net operating cost of $364.9 billion for fiscal year 2002. This MD&A discusses results in a historical context and includes a chart (page 17) that shows the relationship of prior U.S. budget deficits as a percentage of the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP), which is the total value of goods and services produced in the United States. 
Economic Results 
After recovering in fiscal year 2002 from the economic downturn, the economy continued to accelerate in fiscal year 2003 and achieved strong growth. The rate of increase in real GDP picked up in each of the last three quarters of the fiscal year and productivity continued to record substantial gains. The labor market stabilized in fiscal year 2003 following job losses in the previous year and in the final quarter of the fiscal year, employment began to increase. Improvement in the economy was aided by new fiscal policies in 2003, but the lingering effect of the recession and loss in equity wealth, the war with Iraq, homeland security spending, and lower taxes enacted to stimulate growth contributed to a widening in the Federal budget deficit to $374.8 billion for the fiscal year. 
Overall Perspective 
The 2003 balance sheet shows assets of $1,394 billion and liabilities of $8,499 billion, for a balance or negative net position of $7,105 billion. The Government’s responsibilities to make future payments for social insurance and certain other programs are not shown as liabilities according to Federal accounting standards; however, they are measured in other contexts. These programmatic commitments remain Federal responsibilities and as currently structured will have a significant claim on budgetary resources in the future. 
Significant Reporting Items for Fiscal Year 2003  
Department of Defense Property Addition 
In fiscal year 2003, the Department of Defense’s (DOD) reported general property, plant, and equipment, net increased by $323.7 billion or 264.2 percent over fiscal year 2002. The majority of this increase was due to the initial recording of the value of DOD’s military equipment. Beginning with the fiscal year 2003 financial statements, DOD was required to record on the balance sheet the value of its military equipment under the new Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standard No. 23, Eliminating the Category National Defense Property, Plant, and Equipment (SFFAS No. 23) issued by the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) in May 2003. SFFAS No. 23 establishes generally accepted accounting principles for valuing and reporting military equipment in Federal financial statements. Previously, military equipment was reported as national defense property, plant, and equipment in the Stewardship Information section of this report. 
Creation of the Department of Homeland Security 
On March 1, 2003, more than 20 entities and offices and some 180,000 employees were transferred into the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). The creation of the DHS in 2003 was the most significant transformation of the Federal Government since 1947 when the various branches of the U.S. Armed Forces were merged into a new Department of Defense. 
In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the President and the Congress recognized the need to coordinate the efforts of many Federal agencies, offices, and programs which had responsibility for various aspects of protecting and securing our homeland. President Bush proposed the creation of DHS, and Congress passed legislation establishing this new department. See the U.S. Government Structure & Performance section of this report for further details and a chart showing the entities transferred into DHS. 
Iraq Operations 
In March 2003, an international coalition led by the United States liberated Iraq and is overseeing a transformation. The vision for a sovereign, stable, prosperous, and democratic Iraq centered on four goals: establishing a secure environment, restoring essential services, promoting economic growth, and developing good governance through a legitimate constitutional government. To conduct military operations and address these goals in 2003, several sources of funding were used: appropriated and nonappropriated funds (seized and vested assets and the Development Fund for Iraq). U.S. agencies obligated $3.9 billion in appropriated funds for Iraq relief, renewal, and construction. Congress also appropriated funds to DOD for Operation Iraqi Freedom in the Emergency Wartime Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2003 (Public Law 108-11) the Consolidated Appropriations Resolution, 2003 (Public Law 108-7). DOD obligated $42.4 billion for incremental costs in support of Iraqi Freedom. For further discussion of the cost of Iraq operations and funding sources and uses, see Iraq Operations in the Financial Results section at the end of the Revenue and Cost Summary. 
As recently as 1996, not only were just six agencies able to issue financial statements with clean opinions, but most agencies took as least 5 months to issue them. Before implementing the Improved Financial Performance Initiative of the President’s Management Agenda, 18 of 24 of the Government’s major agencies received clean opinions on their audited financial reports, however, it still took 5 months to prepare most of them. Today, most major agencies are getting clean audit opinions and issuing them in a condensed period of time. 
A clean audit opinion provides assurance that agencies are responsibly accounting for the people’s money. If it takes them 5 months to issue audited financial statements, however, it is a good indication they do not have timely and accurate financial information available on a regular basis. That is why the Administration is working with all agencies to close their books more quickly. Eight agencies have accelerated the issuance of audited financial reports to 45 days after year end, which is the 2004 Governmentwide requirement. One particular agency of note is the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), which not only accelerated the reporting of its financial statements, but also received a clean opinion for the first time in its history. Additionally, agencies are now reporting quarterly financial information in addition to the end of the year data. 
Through the first quarter of fiscal year 2004, four agencies–Education, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), National Science Foundation (NSF), and SSA – have demonstrated their ability to use timely and accurate financial information to make decisions about program management. For example, Education uses up-to-the-minute financial data to track whether schools are receiving the appropriate amount of Federal funds. In addition, EPA’s Leaking Underground Storage Tank program negotiates performance commitments with grantees and provides resources based on those commitments. If a grantee is not meeting its commitments, EPA may withhold some resources from the nonperformers and redirect those resources to grantees that are meeting their commitments. 