The brain is a complex organ characterized by heterogeneous patterns of structural connections supporting unparalleled feats of cognition and a wide range of behaviors. New noninvasive imaging techniques now allow these patterns to be carefully and comprehensively mapped in individual humans and animals. Yet, it remains a fundamental challenge to understand how the brain’s structural wiring supports cognitive processes, with major
 implications for the personalized treatment of mental health disorders. Here, we review recent efforts to meet this challenge that draw on intuitions, models, and theories from physics, spanning the domains of statistical mechanics, information theory, and dynamical systems and control. We begin by considering the organizing principles of brain network architecture instantiated in structural wiring under constraints of symmetry, spatial embedding, and energy minimization. We next consider models of brain network function that stipulate how neural activity propagates along these structural connections, producing the long-range interactions and collective dynamics that support a rich repertoire of system functions. Finally,
 we consider perturbative experiments and models for brain network control, which leverage the physics of signal transmission along structural wires to infer intrinsic control processes that support goal-directed behavior and to inform stimulation-based therapies for neurological disease and psychiatric disorders. Throughout, we highlight several open questions in the physics of brain network structure, function, and control that will require creative efforts
 from physicists willing to brave the complexities of living matter.
 2
It is our good fortune as physicists to seek to understand the nature of the observable world around us. In this inquiry, we need not reach to contemporary science to appreciate the fact that our perception of the world around us is inextricably linked to the world within us: the mind.
 Indeed, even Aristotle c. 350 B.C. noted that it is by mapping the structure of the world that the human comes to understand their own mind 1. “Mind thinks itself because it shares the nature of the object of thought; for it becomes an object of thought in coming into contact with and thinking
 its objects, so that mind and object of thought are the same” 2. Over the ensuing 2000-plus years, it has not completely escaped notice that the mappers of the world have unique contributions to offer the mapping of the mind (from Thales of Miletus, c. 624–546 B.C., to Leonardo Da Vinci,
 1452–1519). More recently, it is notable that nearly all famous physicists of the early 20th century– Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, Erwin Schroedinger, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born– considered
 the philosophical implications of their observations and theories 3. In the post-war era, philosophical musings turned to particularly conspicuous empirical contributions at the intersection of neuroscience and artificial intelligence, spanning polymath John von Neumann’s work enhancing
 our understanding of computational architectures 4 and physicist John Hopfield’s invention of the associative neural network, which revolutionized our understanding of collective computation 5. In the contemporary study of the mind and its fundamental organ– the brain– nearly all
 of the domains of physics, perhaps with the exception of relativity, are not only relevant but truly essential, motivating the early coinage of the term neurophysics some four decades ago 6. The fundamentals of electricity and magnetism prove critical for building theoretical models of neurons and the transmission of action potentials 7. These theories are being increasingly informed by mechanics to understand how force-generating and load-bearing proteins bend, curl, kink, buckle, constrict, and stretch to mediate neuronal signaling and plasticity 8. Principles from thermodynamics come into play when predicting how the brain samples the environment (action) or shifts the distribution of information that it encodes (perception) 9. Collectively, theories of brain function are either buttressed or dismantled by imaging, with common tools including magnetic resonance imaging 10 and magnetoencephalography 11, the latter being built on superconducting quantum interference devices and next-generation quantum sensors that can be embedded into a system that
 3
can be worn like a helmet, revolutionizing our ability to measure brain function while allowing free and natural movement 12. Moreover, recent developments in nanoscale analysis tools and in the design and synthesis of nanomaterials have generated optical, electrical, and chemical methods
 to explore brain function by enabling simultaneous measurement and manipulation of the activity of thousands or even millions of neurons 13. Beyond its relevance for continued imaging advancements 14, optics has come to the fore of neuroscience over the last decade with the development
 of optogenetics, an approach that uses light to alter neural processing at the level of single spikes and synaptic events, offering reliable, millisecond-timescale control of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission 15.
 Such astounding advances, enabled by the intersection of physics and neuroscience, have motivated the construction of a National Brain Observatory at the Argonne National Laboratory (Director: Peter Littlewood, previously of Cavendish Laboratories) funded by the National Science Foundation, as well as frequent media coverage including titles in the APS News such as “Physicists, the Brain is Calling You.”16 And as physicists answer the call, our understanding of the brain deepens and our ability to mark and measure its component parts expands. Yet alongside
 this growing systematization and archivation, we have begun to face an increasing realization that it is the interactions between hundreds or thousands of neurons that generate the mind’s functional
 states 13. Indeed, from interactions among neural components emerge computation 17, communication 18, and information propagation 19. We can confidently state of neuroscience what Henri
 Poincare, the French mathematician, theoretical physicist, and philosopher of science, states of science generally: “The aim of science is not things themselves, as the dogmatists in their simplicity imagine, but the relations among things; outside these relations there is no reality knowable.”20 The
 overarching goal of mapping these interactions in neural systems has motivated multibillion-dollar investments across the United States (the Brain Initiative generally, and the Human Connectome Project specifically 21), the European Union (the Blue Brain Project 22), China (the China Brain Project 23), and Japan (Japan’s Brain/MINDS project 24)