Ruth Porat, President and Chief Investment Officer; CFO, Alphabet and Google: Thank
you, Philipp.
We are very pleased with our financial results for the first quarter, driven in particular by
strength in Search and Cloud, as well as the ongoing efforts to durably re-engineer our cost
base.
My comments will be on year-over-year comparisons for the first quarter, unless I state
otherwise.
I will start with results at the Alphabet level, followed by segment results, and conclude with our
outlook.
For the first quarter, our consolidated revenues were $80.5 billion, up 15% or up 16% in
constant currency. Search remained the largest contributor to revenue growth.
In terms of total expenses, the year-on-year comparisons reflect the impact of the restructuring
charges we took in the first quarter of 2023, of $2.6 billion, as well as the $716 million in
employee severance and related charges in the first quarter of 2024.
As you can see in our earnings release, these charges were allocated across the expense lines
in Other Cost of Revenues and OpEx based on associated headcount. To help with
year-on-year comparisons, we included a table in our earnings release to adjust Other Cost of
Revenues, operating expenses, operating income and operating margin to exclude the impact
of severance and related office space charges in the first quarter of 2023 versus 2024.
In terms of expenses, total Cost of Revenues was $33.7 billion, up 10%.
Other Cost of Revenues was $20.8 billion, up 10% on a reported basis, with the increase driven
primarily by content acquisition costs associated with YouTube, given the very strong revenue
growth in both subscription offerings and ad-supported content.
On an adjusted basis, Other Cost of Revenues were up 13% year-on-year.
Operating expenses were $21.4 billion, down 2% on a reported basis, primarily reflecting
expense decreases in sales and marketing and G&A, offset by an increase in R&D. The largest
10
single factor in the year-on-year decline in G&A expenses was lower charges related to legal
matters.
On an adjusted basis, operating expenses were up 5%, reflecting; first, in R&D, an increase in
compensation expense, primarily for Google DeepMind and Cloud; and second, in Sales and
Marketing a slight increase year-on-year, reflecting increases in compensation expense,
primarily for Cloud sales.
Operating income was $25.5 billion, up 46% on a reported basis, and our operating margin was
32%.
On an adjusted basis, operating income was up 31%, and our operating margin was 33%.
Net income was $23.7 billion, and EPS was $1.89.
We delivered free cash flow of $16.8 billion in the first quarter and $69.1 billion for the trailing
12 months. We ended the quarter with $108 billion in cash and marketable securities.
Turning to segment results, within Google Services, revenues were $70.4 billion, up 14%.
Google Search & Other advertising revenues of $46.2 billion in the quarter were up 14%, led
again by growth in retail.
YouTube advertising revenues of $8.1 billion, were up 21%, driven by both direct response and
brand advertising.
Network advertising revenues of $7.4 billion were down 1%.
Subscriptions, Platforms and Devices revenues were $8.7 billion, up 18%, primarily reflecting
growth in YouTube subscription revenues.
TAC was $12.9 billion, up 10%.
Google Services Operating Income was $27.9 billion, up 28%, and the operating margin was
40%.
Turning to the Google Cloud segment, revenues were $9.6 billion for the quarter, up 28%,
reflecting significant growth in GCP, with an increasing contribution from AI and strong Google
Workspace growth, primarily driven by increases in average revenue per seat.
Google Cloud delivered Operating Income of $900 million and an operating margin of 9%.
As to our Other Bets, for the first quarter, revenues were $495 million, benefiting from a
milestone payment in one of the Other Bets. The operating loss was $1 billion.
11
Turning to our outlook for the business, with respect to Google Services. First, within
Advertising, we are very pleased with the momentum of our Ads businesses. Search had
broad-based strength across verticals. In YouTube, we had acceleration in revenue growth
driven by brand and direct response.
Looking ahead, two points to call out. First, results in our advertising business in Q1 continued
to reflect strength in spend from APAC-based retailers, a trend that began in the second quarter
of 2023 and continued through Q1, which means we will begin lapping that impact in the
second quarter.
Second, the YouTube acceleration in revenue growth in Q1 reflects, in part, lapping the
negative year-on-year growth we experienced in the first quarter of 2023.
Turning to Subscriptions, Platforms and Devices. We continue to deliver significant growth in
our subscriptions business, which drives the majority of revenue growth in this line. The
sequential quarterly decline in year-on-year revenue growth for the line in Q1, versus Q4,
reflects, in part, the fact that we had only one week of Sunday Ticket subscription revenue in
Q1 versus fourteen weeks in Q4.
Looking forward, we will anniversary last year's price increase in YouTube TV starting in May.
With regard to Platforms, we are pleased with the performance in Play driven by an increase in
buyers.
With respect to Google Cloud, performance in Q1 reflects strong demand for our GCP
infrastructure and solutions, as well as the contribution from our Workspace productivity tools.
The growth we are seeing across Cloud is underpinned by the benefit AI provides for our
customers. We continue to invest aggressively, while remaining focused on profitable growth.
As we look ahead, two points that will affect sequential year-on-year revenue growth
comparisons across Alphabet.
First, Q1 results reflect the benefit of Leap Year, which contributed slightly more than one point
to our revenue growth rate at the consolidated level in the first quarter.
Second, at current spot rates, we expect a larger headwind from foreign exchange in Q2 versus
Q1.
Turning to margins, our efforts to durably re-engineer our cost base are reflected in a 400 basis
point expansion of our Alphabet operating margin year-on-year, excluding the impact of
restructuring and severance charges in both periods.
You can also see the impact in the quarter-on-quarter decline in headcount in Q1, which reflects
12
both actions we have taken over the past few months and a much slower pace of hiring.
As we have discussed previously, we are continuing to invest in top engineering and technical
talent, particularly in Cloud, Google DeepMind and Technical Infrastructure.
Looking ahead, we remain focused on our efforts to moderate the pace of expense growth in
order to create capacity for the increases in depreciation and expenses associated with the
higher levels of investment in our technical infrastructure. We believe these efforts will enable
us to deliver full-year 2024 Alphabet operating margin expansion relative to 2023.
With respect to CapEx, our reported CapEx in the first quarter was $12 billion, once again
driven overwhelmingly by investment in our technical infrastructure, with the largest component
for servers, followed by data centers.
The significant year-on-year growth in CapEx in recent quarters reflects our confidence in the
opportunities offered by AI across our business.
Looking ahead, we expect quarterly CapEx throughout the year to be roughly at or above the
Q1 level, keeping in mind that the timing of cash payments can cause variability in quarterly
reported CapEx.
With regard to Other Bets, we similarly have workstreams under way to enhance overall
returns.
Finally, as I trust you saw in the press release, we are very pleased to be adding a quarterly
dividend of $.20 per share to our capital return program, as well as a new $70 billion
authorization in share repurchases.
The core of our capital allocation framework remains the same, beginning with investing
aggressively in our business as you have heard us talk about today, given the extraordinary
opportunities ahead. We view the introduction of the dividend as further strengthening our
overall capital return program.
Thank you. Sundar, Philipp and I will now take your questions.