Thank you for choosing the Capresso Steam PRO Espresso & Cappuccino
Machine. It is the perfect starter machine for espressos, cappuccinos and lattes.
With a bit of practice you will be able to produce two to four cappuccinos or
lattes at a time. Please read all of the instructions in this booklet before
operating your new machine. Understanding and complying with these
instructions is essential to ensure that the machine is utilized without risk and
to ensure safety during operation and maintenance.
2. HOW TO REACH JURA-CAPRESSO
Should you require further information or if particular problems occur that are
not covered in this manual, please
• CALL our toll free HELP LINE: 1-800-767-3554 Monday -Thursday 8AM
to 9PM, Friday 8AM to 8PM and Saturday 9AM to 5PM Eastern Standard
Time. Feel free to call at any time. If you are connected to our voicemail,
PLEASE DO NOT HANG UP. Leave your name, telephone number and we will
return your call. Please also leave the model number of your Capresso
product, in this case it is #304.
• FAX us at 1-201-767-9684
• E-MAIL us at contact@jura-capresso.com
• VISIT our website at www.capresso.com
• WRITE to Jura Capresso, Inc., Customer Service, P.O. Box 775,
Closter, NJ 07624
3. DE-PRESSURIZING
CAUTION! Never open the boiler cap and never remove the filter holder as
long as there is pressure in the boiler container. In order to check if the
machine is still under pressure follow these steps:
1. The machine is on, the filter holder is inserted and the boiler cap is closed.
2. Place an empty cup under the frother nozzle (fig. 10).
3. Move the coffee/steam selector to the steam symbol (fig. 8).
4. Open the steam knob (fig. 9). Wait until all steam is released.
6
5. Turn the power switch off (fig. 6).
6. Open and remove the boiler cap (see chapter 5)
7. It is now safe to remove the filter holder.
8. Move the coffee/steam selector to the cup symbol (fig. 8).
Caution: Never try to remove the filter holder with the carafe in place. Pressure
could force the filter holder down, smashing the carafe and causing severe
injuries. Always remove the carafe first.
Caution: Never leave machine unattended when it is turned on (red light in the
power switch is illuminated). Always turn the machine off when finished.
5. SAFETY BOILER CAP
To open the boiler cap: turn the cap a quarter turn counter clockwise. Slightly
lift the cap and turn another quarter turn counter clockwise and lift the cap.
To close the boiler cap: Place the cap onto the boiler neck and turn clockwise
until cap sinks into the groove. Continue turning the cap until firmly locked.
6. HELPFUL HINTS
• Espresso Drink: An espresso is a far richer drink with a more intense taste
than regular brewed drip coffee. An espresso is normally 1 1/2 to 2 oz. of
strong coffee. Espresso should be served immediately after brewing. If the
espresso is too strong, you can add hot water. Add sugar to taste.
• Preparing espresso is different than preparing regular drip coffee. The machine
works under pressure, bringing the water to a boil and then forcing it through
the ground coffee in a short period of time.
• Important: The water in the boiler of the machine will get hotter during the
brewing process. Towards the end of the brewing process the water will be
so hot that it would burn your espresso. Therefore you never want to process
all the water through the coffee as this will result in a burnt taste.
• Which Coffee? Any coffee labeled "espresso" is suitable for your machine.
Any coffee with at least 80% Arabica beans is ideal for espresso preparation.
Check with your local coffee store
• Which Grind? Steam boiler espresso machines, do not require a fine espresso
grind. For maximum flavor and aroma we recommend a medium espresso
grind or a fine drip grind. If you grind your own coffee we recommend using a
burr or disk/burr grinder. Small blade grinders can create "coffee dust".
Coffee dust can dramatically slow down the water flow during brewing
resulting in bitter and overheated coffee taste.
• Cappuccino: 1 1/2 to 2 oz. of espresso coffee with 3 to 4 oz. of steamed
and frothed milk on top. Sprinkle chocolate shavings or cinnamon on top of
7
the milk froth. For a stronger taste increase the amount of coffee. For a
milder taste increase the amount of milk.
• Latte: 1 1/2 to 2 oz. of espresso coffee with 3 to 4 oz. of steamed milk (very
little or no milk froth).
• Frothing: Foamy layer of milk froth on top of hot milk.
• Which kind of milk? Skim milk and 1% milk will produce more milk froth
than 2% or regular milk.
• Markings on Glass Carafe: The markings on the glass carafe help you in the
preparation of brewing and frothing.
Upper rim of metal band: Maximum capacity of boiler (approx. 10 oz.).
For best results always fill the boiler with 10 oz. of fresh cold water.
4 cup marking: Maximum amount of espresso you should brew (approx.
8 oz.). If you brew more than 8 oz. the coffee will taste burnt. Depending on
the coffee roast you might even want to brew a little less to avoid a bitter aroma.
2 cup marking: (approx. 4 oz.), guide line for a double shot of espresso.
Bottom line marking: Once the coffee has reached this level there is enough
pressure in the boiler for steaming and frothing.
7. PREPARING ESPRESSO
Caution: Do not leave the machine alone during brewing.
Keep children away during brewing.
1. Make sure the machine is plugged in and turned off. The glass carafe is
removed from the drip tray. Important: The steam knob (fig. 9) must be in the
closed position. The coffee/steam selector points to the cup symbol in front
of the machine (stronger coffee). Moving the coffee/steam selector to the
right, accelerates brewing and decreases coffee strength.
2. Fill the basket with ground coffee, using the measuring scoop (fig.1). The
basket is marked on the inside indicating "2 cups" and "4 cups". Never
overfill the basket. Clear any excess coffee from the rim of the filter holder.
Important: it is not necessary to tamp (press down) the coffee.
3. Insert the basket into the filter holder (fig. 2), then insert the filter holder into
the machine (fig. 3).
4. Turn filter holder to the right until it reaches the "locked" position (fig.1,8).
5. Fill the glass carafe to the upper rim of the metal band (approx. 10 oz.)
with fresh, cold water.
6. Unscrew the boiler cap (see chapter 5). Using the glass carafe, fill the boiler
with water (fig. 4) and close the boiler cap securely (see chapter 5).
7. Place the carafe lid on the carafe so that the opening on the lid points
towards the pouring spout of the carafe (fig. 7). Place the carafe on the drip
tray as shown in fig. 1.
8. Turn the power switch on (fig. 6). The power switch illuminates and the
machine starts heating the water.
9. After approx. 2 1/2 to 3 minutes hot water will start forcing its way through
the filter holder into the carafe.
When you have enough espresso in the glass carafe turn the power switch
off and turn the coffee/steam selector to the steam symbol on the left to
stop the flow. Remove the carafe and serve. Add a bit of sugar and enjoy.
Tip: To avoid a "burnt taste" never process all the water through the coffee.
Once the brewing noise increases and steam develops, stop the brewing.
8
10. Important: Do not open the boiler cap. Do not remove the filter holder. First
depressurize the machine. See chapter 3.
11. After de-pressurizing remove the filter holder by turning it to the left to the
"open lock" symbol. Then push the thumb-guard of filter holder over the
hot rim of the basket. Dump the used coffee (fig. 13) and rinse the basket
and the filter holder under running water. Return the coffee/steam selector
to the cup symbol.