Mobile and Portable Devices
Portable and mobile devices that operate in the Cellular Radiotelephone Service (47 CFR 22
Subpart H), the Personal Communications Service (PCS) (47 CFR 24), the Satellite
Communications Service (47 CFR 25), the Wireless Communications Service (47 CFR 27), the
Maritime Service (ship earth stations only) (47 CFR 80), and Specialized Mobile Radio Service
(47 CFR 24, 25, 27, 80 (ship earth stations devices only) and 90) at frequencies of 1.5 GHz or
below and their effective radiated power (ERP) is 1.5 watts or more, or if they operate at
frequencies above 1.5 GHz and their ERP is 3 watts or more, are subject to RF emissions
requirements as specified in the rule part that they operate under. All of these portable and
mobile devices are also subject to the routine environmental evaluation for RF exposure
requirement of 47 CFR 2.1091 (bottom of page 706) (mobile devices) and/or 47 CFR 2.1093
(page 708) (portable devices) prior to equipment authorization or use.
Portable devices operating in the Wireless Medical Telemetry Service (WMTS) (47 CFR Part 95
Subpart H) and the Medical Device Radio communications Service (MEDRADIO) (47 CFR 95
Subpart I) are subject to RF emissions limits as specified in the rule part they operate under
and also to routine environmental evaluation for RF exposure prior to equipment
authorization or use. Unlicensed PCS (47 CFR Part 15 Subpart D), Unlicensed National
Information Infrastructure (U-NII) (47 CFR Part 15 Subpart E), and millimeter wave devices (47
CFR Part 15 Subpart C) are subject to RF emission requirements specified in the rule section
they operate in and are also subject to routine environmental evaluation for RF exposure
prior to equipment authorization or use if their ERP is 3 watts or more or if they meet the
definition of a portable device. All other mobile and portable devices are categorically excluded
from routine environmental evaluation for RF exposure.
The FCC differentiates mobile and portable devices by the proximity to the user during use.
Mobile devices, covered under 47 CFR 2.1091 (page 706), are defined as a transmitting device
designed to be used in other than fixed locations and generally used in a manner that the
radiating structure is at least 20 cm from the body of the user or nearby persons. Examples of
mobile and portable devices include cellular and PCS mobile telephones with vehicle mounted
antennas and other radio devices that use vehicle mounted antennas. These devices must be
evaluated for exposure potential with respect to Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) limits
for field strength or power density or with respect to specific absorption rate (SAR) limits,
whichever is most appropriate for the specific use and operating configuration of the device.
Portable devices, covered under 47 CFR 2.1093 (page 708), are defined as a transmitting device
designed to be used so the radiating structure is within 20 cm of the body of the user. These
devices include handheld cellular phones and PCS mobile phones that incorporate the radiating
antenna into the hand-piece and wireless transmitters carried close to the body. RF evaluation
must be based on specific absorption rate (SAR) limits.