ABSTRACT Flying vehicle-related technology development is progressing rapidly. As autonomous vehicles begin to be commercialized, interest in the development of flying vehicle technology is increasing. Recently, some countries have launched services that utilize flying car technology along with self-driving cars. The automobile industry is undergoing rapid change by combining IT technology with automobile technology. The center of this change is the flying car-related technology that will be integrated onto the car of the future. Flying vehicle technology will be combined with autonomous vehicle technology to develop into a tool for more convenient human life. This paper examines the trend of flying automobile technology in relation to the flow of automobile technology. Keywords: Flying Car, VTOL, Flying Car Technology Trend, PAV. 1. INTRODUCTION The era of self-driving cars, where cars come to pick up people and take them to their destinations, is approaching. A number of automobile companies and IT companies, including Google, are participating in the development of autonomous vehicles. The era of self-driving cars will become a future that everyone is familiar with. And now, a new means of transportation that goes beyond self-driving cars is attracting attention. After IT companies such as Google and Uber took the lead and showed interest in flying cars, interest in flying cars is growing, especially in the United States. Flying car is a concept that has recently emerged and there is no fully agreed definition yet. “Is a flying car a car or an airplane?” It is also ambiguous to answer these questions. Flying cars can run on the road or fly if necessary. Flying cars do not require a wide horizontal runway like airplanes, and are expected to take off and land by lifting the aircraft vertically. It can be used like a car on the road and can fly in the sky when necessary [9]. Many companies such as Airbus and Rolls-Royce of the UK are jumping into the competition to develop technology related to flying cars
Progressive Academic Publishing, UK Page 2 www.idpublications.org GM unveiled the Cadillac flying car and electric shuttle concept car at CES 2021. At CES 2021, the world's largest ICT exhibition, GM said, "GM's future mobility concepts of flying cars and electric shuttles are means of transportation that can confirm GM's direction for the next five years.” Beyond the era of autonomous vehicles, we have now entered the stage of technology development for the era of flying cars [1, 2, 3, 11]. Flying cars, unlike self-driving cars, fly in the sky, so there are many more problems to be solved. In addition, global standards and definitions related to technology for flying cars have not been established. This paper intends to examine the technology trends related to these flying cars. 2. FLYING CAR RELATED ISSUES There are many problems to be solved in order for flying cars to be commercialized in the form of flying cars that are operated on the road and take off into the air when necessary [3, 4, 5]. Some of these issues are as follows:
(1) Technical issues There are many technical problems with flying cars. Ultimately, only when flying cars become popular it will be able to achieve the goals of traffic congestion and convenience. It is important to develop technology that can lower the price of flying cars. Of course, if flying cars become popular and mass-produced, the price is expected to be lowered naturally. Technology to reduce noise generated by flying cars is also emerging as a problem to be solved. In addition, it is expected that popularization can be accelerated only when sensor-related technology development to ensure safety for operation and technology related to autonomous flight capable of flying without human intervention are developed. In addition, it is important to develop battery-related technology for a long flight. Only when these technical problems are resolved people will be able to use them safely. (2) System improvement and infrastructure establishment In relation to flying cars, optimistic predictions about the operation of aerial vehicles are predicted when the VTOL (Vertical Take-off and Landing) type of technology is introduced. On the other hand, in order to settle as a convenient means of transportation with the introduction of flying cars, the government's active policy change is necessary. It is necessary to build a dedicated space for PAV (Personal Air Vehicle) for vertical take-off and landing in the city. It is also essential to establish a place to charge the PAV's electricity. It is also necessary to enact systems and laws in parallel with the establishment of such infrastructure. Most countries have so far established systems and laws centered on automobiles, a means of transportation. A work must also be done to make these systems and laws fit the environment of the flying car, a new means of transportation. It is expected that it will take time for the construction of infrastructure for flying cars and the work of enacting systems and laws. If flying cars are commercialized, there is a possibility that traffic jams on the ground will occur in the sky. It is also essential to develop a system that can efficiently manage and control such traffic jams in the air. Flying cars are expected to make human life more convenient as a new means of transportation along with autonomous vehicles.