Atlantic Council     
ADRIENNE ARSHT 
LATIN AMERICA CENTER
The Economic Impact of aMore Efficient US-MexicoBorder How Reducing Wait Times at Land Ports of Entry Would  Promote Commerce, Resilience, and Job Creation 
Report Contributors: 
Alejandro Brugués Rodríguez, John Byrd, Noé Arón Fuentes Flores, David Gaytan, John Gibson, Camila Hernández,  Mayra Maldonado, Jason Marczak, Jorge Eduardo Mendoza Cota, Roberto Ransom, and Ignacia Ulloa 
Atlantic Council 
ADRIENNE ARSHT 
LATIN AMERICA CENTER 
The Atlantic Council’s nonpartisan Adrienne Arsht Latin America Center  (AALAC) broadens understanding of regional transformations while  demonstrating why Latin America and the Caribbean matter for the world.  The center focuses on pressing political, economic, and social issues that  will define the region’s trajectory, proposing constructive, results-oriented  solutions to inform public sector, business, and multilateral action based on a  shared vision for a more prosperous, inclusive, and sustainable future.  
AALAC – home to the premier Caribbean Initiative – builds consensus for  action in advancing innovative policy perspectives within select lines of  programing: U.S. policy in the Western Hemisphere; Colombia’s future;  Venezuela’s multidimensional crisis; Central American prosperity; US-Mexico  ties; China in the Americas; Brazil’s trajectory; Caribbean development;  regional economic development and commerce; and energy transitions.  Jason Marczak serves as the center’s senior director.
This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council  Policy on Intellectual Independence. The authors are solely responsible for  its analysis and recommendations. The Atlantic Council and its donors do  not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this  report’s conclusions. 
Atlantic Council 
1030 15th Street NW, 12th Floor 
Washington, DC 20005 
For more information, please visit 
www.AtlanticCouncil.org. 
ISBN-13: 978-1-61977-250-2 
September 2022 
A joint report by the Atlantic Council’s Adrienne Arsht Latin America Center, the University of Texas  
at El Paso’s Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness, and El Colegio de la Frontera Norte. 
Atlantic Council     
ADRIENNE ARSHT 
LATIN AMERICA CENTER
The Economic Impact of aMore Efficient US-MexicoBorder How Reducing Wait Times at Land Ports of Entry Would  Promote Commerce, Resilience, and Job Creation 
(The first of a two-part series on the US-Mexico Border) 
Report Contributors:  
Alejandro Brugués Rodríguez, John Byrd,  
Noé Arón Fuentes Flores, David Gaytan,  
John Gibson, Camila Hernández,  
Mayra Maldonado, Jason Marczak,  
Jorge Eduardo Mendoza Cota,  
Roberto Ransom, and Ignacia Ulloa 
Table of Contents 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 6 INTRODUCTION 7 WHY INVEST IN THE US-MEXICO BORDER? 8 BORDER WAIT TIMES: A CONTINUED CHALLENGE 9 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 11 
The United States: Increased border efficiency would strengthen the economy 12 Mexico: The potential economic gains of a more efficient border 15 CONCLUSION 17 METHODOLOGY 18 APPENDICES 19 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 38
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
“We know that long wait times at the border can hurt our  businesses and economy, especially in my district. Ensuring  our ports of entry have sufficient funding to reduce wait  times is necessary to keep our economy on track and ensure  businesses on both sides of the border succeed.” The Hon. Juan Vargas 
Representative (D-CA-51) 
US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
“Strengthened US-Mexico collaboration at our border will  unlock significant economic growth, promote supply chain  resilience, and boost competitiveness, benefiting Mexican  
workers and families. These benefits will reverberate far  beyond the border, reaching states throughout Mexico. Now is  the time to invest in initiatives to create an even more efficient  and secure shared border.” 
H.E. Luz Maria de la Mora 
Subsecretary of International Commerce,  
Secretariat of the Economy 
UNITED MEXICAN STATES 
“Our border communities rely on efficient and effective  infrastructure for work, trade, tourism and other economic  exchanges across the US-Mexico border. As the North  American region seeks to retain its competitive global  advantage, it is more important than ever for these  communities to have access to top-notch ports of entry,  staffing and technology. With the proper tools for border  management, our border cities will be enabled to prosper now  and well into the future.” 
The Hon. Tony Gonzales 
Representative (R-TX-23) 
US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
5 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Executive Summary 
Improvements in border management and the adoption of  
new technologies at the US-Mexico border have the potential  to enhance security and generate economic benefits for the  United States and Mexico through expedited flows of goods  
and people. Reduced border wait times would lead to more traffic  entering the United States from Mexico, both in terms of commercial  trucks loaded with goods for US consumers and shoppers ready to  buy US goods. This report quantifies the economic impact of this  additional commerce and cross-border spending, which would lead  to further economic prosperity in the two countries. 
Research shows that a 10-minute reduction in wait times could lead  to an additional $26 million worth of cargo entering the United  States each month via commercial vehicles. This translates to more  than $312 million in further commerce from Mexico into the United  States annually. The extra inventory of finished and intermediate  goods would drive down US domestic prices, creating increased  economic well-being for US citizens. 
This report also finds that reducing border wait times by 10 minutes  has a positive annual impact of $5.4 million on the US economy  due to purchases by additional families and individuals entering  the United States from Mexico. While the immediate effect of  these purchases is most evident in border communities, economic  benefits would spread to the continental United States due to the  
economic linkages between local economies, with approximately  25 percent of the total impact reaching non-border states. 
Beyond the $312 million in added commerce from Mexico into  the United States, a 10-minute reduction in border wait times  would promote the creation of nearly 18,700 direct and indirect  jobs in Mexico, increase labor income per sector by an average of  $17,474, and simulate growth for various Mexican economic sectors,  particularly manufacturing, wholesale trade, and mining. 
More specifically, a one-minute reduction in border wait times would  increase the average production (or output) per sector—for Mexico’s  top ten sectors exporting to the United States—by 2 percent. This  reduction in border wait times would also boost intermediate sales  and aggregate demand in Mexico by 2.4 percent and 1.7 percent,  respectively. 
These findings illustrate the economic benefits of prioritizing  investments at the US-Mexico border to reduce commercial and  noncommercial wait times. They are understood as the lower range  of the potential national-level economic benefits of deepened  US-Mexico collaboration to create a more efficient and secure  border. A forthcoming second study will build on these findings,  disaggregating the economic impact of reduced wait times for US  and Mexican states and counties at the border and beyond. 
  
Trucks pass through the U.S. border and into the United States from Juarez, Mexico in El Paso, Texas, U.S. June 18, 2018. REUTERS/Mike Blake
6 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Introduction 
The US-Mexico border is a hub of cultural and commercial  
exchange, fostering continued growth and collaboration  between the United States and Mexico. Stretching over  2,000 miles, it has more than forty-four active ports of  
entry, with fifteen million US and Mexican citizens residing in border  counties. In July 2022 alone, the United States and Mexico traded  over $65 billion in goods,1 with more than $53 billion crossing the  southern border via trucks and trains.2 
Approximately five million US jobs depend on trade with Mexico,3 meaning that one in every twenty-nine workers in the United States  has a job created or supported by US-Mexico trade. These jobs are  spread throughout the US economy in terms of geography and  industries. In Mexico’s automotive sector, US-Mexico trade supports  more than one million jobs directly and 4.5 million indirectly.4 
In addition to importing and exporting final products, the United  States and Mexico jointly produce goods. Cross-border production  sharing has contributed to greater economic integration, resilience,  and competitiveness while helping to insulate the US and Mexican  economies from global competitors. Similarly, US-Mexico trade in  services contributes to the commercial relationship, with over $62  billion traded in 2019.5 
On July 12, 2022, US President Joseph R. Biden and Mexican  President Andrés Manuel López Obrador met in Washington,  DC, to discuss how safer and more efficient borders would  enhance shared commerce.6 During their meeting, the United  States committed to investing $3.4 billion and Mexico $1.5 billion  to undertake major projects to modernize land ports of entry on  the northern and southern borders. These efforts will create jobs,  bolster shared security, and enhance supply chain resilience by  promoting legitimate trade and travel. 
New investments should continue to enhance shared commerce  while addressing long-standing efficiency and security  challenges, including excessive wait times, inconsistent federal  policies, outdated screening technologies, and the illicit flow of  weapons, drugs, contraband, and people. Future US-Mexico  cooperation should also build on prior efforts to modernize border  infrastructure, expedite processing times, and implement joint  production programs through accords such as the United States Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA). It could also prioritize new  information-sharing infrastructure, shared defense strategies,  bilateral-processing mechanisms, and expanded trusted traveler  programs. The long-term institutionalization of standing working  groups like the US-Mexico High-Level Economic Dialogue (HLED)  will help the United States and Mexico align priorities and advance  shared development goals moving forward—as evidenced through  the joint commitments made at the September 12, 2022, HLED  meeting.7 
This report—the first in a two-part series—shows that US-Mexico  cooperation aimed at creating a more efficient, resilient, and secure  border will enhance shared commerce and economic well-being  through the expedited flow of goods and people. Reduced border  wait times would allow more commercial and noncommercial  vehicles to enter the United States from Mexico, bolstering cross 
border trade and spending and stimulating competitiveness,  economic integration, and job creation. This report includes  national-level findings, while a second report disaggregates results  by county and state, showing that investing in the US-Mexico border  will pay dividends far beyond the border.
7 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Why Invest in the US-Mexico Border? 
The United States and Mexico rely on each other to meet  
their populations’ demand for goods and services. Mexico  stands as one of the United States’ largest trading partners  in terms of goods, ranking first in 2019 with more than $614  
billion in total (two-way) goods traded that year.8 Recent disruptions  to cross-border commerce illustrate this interdependence, with  important economic implications for populations on both sides of  the border. 
As COVID-19 first raged worldwide, shutting down economies in the  spring of 2020, the US-Mexico border was not immune to the global  lockdown. Disruptions in cross-border flows of goods and people  resulted in unemployment, curtailed retail sales, and decreased  revenue for the tourism industry. In Texas alone, the tourism industry  lost $1.02 billion over the course of eight months of border closures.  In Mexico, agricultural exports decreased 5.9 percent between  March and May of 2020, with a 17.9 percent decrease in sugar  exports compared to 2019.9 
Avocados are another example of US-Mexico economic  interdependence. Approximately nine of ten avocados in US  supermarkets come from Mexico.10 In 2021 alone, the United States  imported more than 1.1 million metric tons of avocados from Mexico,  totaling over $2.8 billion. However, a temporary suspension of  avocado imports—due to a verbal threat received by a US inspector  in Michoacán—led to concerns over shortages and price increases  across the United States.11 Fortunately, the eight-day suspension  did not have a lasting impact on local economies or spoil the fruit  waiting for export. Soon after the suspension was lifted, avocados  quickly returned to US supermarkets to satisfy consumer demand. 
The story of COVID-related commerce disruptions and the  avocado example not only illustrate the two countries’ economic  
interdependence but also the importance of safe and efficient  borders. According to US Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the  average border-crossing wait time per truck regularly surpasses 125  minutes during regular-to-peak crossing hours.12 Multiplied by the  average of 19,617 trucks crossing the border daily, the lost revenue  amounts to millions of dollars annually for the United States and  Mexico. 
Cross-border spending by noncommercial entities (families and  individuals) also directly impacts the US and Mexican economies.  Cities along the southern border of the United States have become  attractive commercial poles that draw customers from Mexico up  to 75 miles (120 kilometers) away for daily consumption of goods  and services. This is partly due to trade mechanisms becoming  antiquated under new international trade agreements (originally  designed to retain customers in local markets and supply border  counties with national products) and the limitations of the Mexican  domestic market, which often translates to higher prices and lower  quality in goods such as food, clothing, footwear, and household  equipment. 
The United States and Mexico have created a series of tools to  expedite border crossings for pedestrians, trains, and commercial  and noncommercial vehicles, including Unified Cargo Processing,13 Global Entry, Secure Electronic Network for Travelers Rapid  Inspection (SENTRI),14 Customs Trade Partnership Against  Terrorism,15 and other trusted traveler programs. However, these  mechanisms only serve a small portion of daily border crossers,  given high annual fees and other prohibitive eligibility requirements.  For example, only 175,000 citizens in the United States and Mexico  have become SENTRI card holders.16 Building on these and other  programs is essential as US and Mexican leaders work together to  tap the full economic potential of our shared border.
8 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Border Wait Times: A Continued Challenge 
Bottlenecks at land ports of entry along the US-Mexico  
border present a long-term challenge for economic  integration, supply chain resilience, and competitiveness.  While international production sharing programs  
such as the USMCA and the Maquiladora Export Industry17 have  promoted mutually beneficial trade, they have contributed to  border congestion by increasing the volume of vehicles requiring  border inspections. Congestion and associated wait times are  compounded by outdated technologies and limited information  sharing within and between agencies in Mexico and the United  States. Curtailing the illegal flow of weapons, drugs, contraband,  and people also requires stringent and time-consuming border  inspections that may lead to border delays. 
As shown in Figure 1, non-expedited cargo (commercial vehicles)  entering the United States from Mexico undergoes a multistep  inspection process. The first processing step involves examination  by Mexican border agents who verify paperwork for outgoing  goods, ensuring that tariffs are accurately assigned.18 Once cargo  
reaches US inspection booths, CBP officers first examine relevant  documentation for incoming merchandise and drivers, who are  then subject to automated regulation and tariff compliance reviews.  At the officers’ discretion, cargo can undergo an additional canine  or gamma ray inspection before being cleared for crossing.
Noncommercial vehicles entering the United States from Mexico  also undergo a multistep inspection process. Depending on the  type of border crossing (i.e., land or bridge), vehicles could be  required to pay tolls in cash or via electronic toll collection systems.  Once completed, vehicles continue to US inspection points, where  they can undergo up to two separate inspections. At the primary  inspection booth, CBP officials verify travelers’ documentation  and inquire about the purpose of their visit to the United States. If  the Interagency Border Inspection System finds records of norm  violation,20 CBP officers direct the vehicle toward secondary  inspection. At the secondary inspection, officers conduct a  thorough identity investigation, after which access to the United  States is either granted or denied. 
Figure 1: Inspection Process for Commercial Vehicles at the US-Mexico Border19 1. Mexican Export Lot 2. US Federal Compound 3. State Safety Facility 
Warehouse / Yard 
Mexican export  documentation  verifications and  cargo inspection  selection 
Mexican  
export  
cargo  
inspection 
CBP primary  inspection  
(document  
inspection) 
Secondary  
inspection 
VACIS, X-Ray,  FMCSA  
`Others 
Visual vehicle  safety  
inspection 
Detailed state  truck safety  
inspection 
Warehouse / Yard 
Mexico United  
SOURCE: US Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, “Border-wide Assessment of Intelligent Transportation System  (ITS) Technology—Current and Future Concepts,” https://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/fhwahop12015/ch2.htm, 2022. 
9 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
  
Trucks wait in a long queue for border customs control to cross into the U.S., in one of the main roads of Tijuana, Mexico, April 18, 2019. REUTERS/Andres  Martinez Casares - RC1CE4339C90
Despite the implementation of numerous interventions to enhance  the border-user experience, border users consulted while preparing  this report expressed concerns about inconsistent federal policies  that are not well attuned to their needs.21 For example, outdated  technologies at port facilities lead to inaccurate time projections  on official agency platforms, making border users turn to social  media to better estimate wait and crossing times. Similarly,  double inspection processes and unstandardized documentation  
requirements in different ports of entry generate delays in border  crossings, which ultimately increase transport expenses. 
Finding ways to efficiently process the large volume of commercial  and noncommercial vehicles crossing the border while  safeguarding national security should remain a priority for the  bilateral relationship. This will improve the border-user experience  and result in substantial economic gains for both countries. 
10 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
The Economic Impact of a More  
Efficient US-Mexico Border 
Reduced wait times at the US-Mexico directly impact the  
US and Mexican economies through increased cross border commerce (commercial vehicles) and spending  (noncommercial vehicles). This section quantifies the  
nationwide dollar value that would result from additional traffic  entering the United States from Mexico following a 10-minute  reduction in border wait times. The economic impact is estimated  for the US and Mexican economies. 
OUR APPROACH 
The Atlantic Council’s Adrienne Arsht Latin America Center  partnered with the Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness at the  
University of Texas at El Paso and El Colegio de la Frontera Norte to  produce this two-part study. Findings in this first report result from  roundtables, focus groups, and individual consultations carried out  virtually across both countries and in-person in Washington, DC;  El Paso, Texas; and Tijuana, Mexico; and the analysis of economic  data from the United States and Mexico. This study utilizes two  economic models; one uses US data, emphasizing the US economy,  and another employs Mexican data, focusing on the Mexican  economy. As a starting point, both sides of the border were viewed  independently to account for discrepancies in data availability and  the specific methodologies of local partners and stakeholders. By  later harmonizing findings and data, the scope and range of results  were extended, ultimately determining the costs and benefits of  reducing border wait times for both economies. 
USEFUL TERMS
• Commercial traffic: loaded or unloaded vehicles (usually trucks or trains) that  cross the US-Mexico border with the intent to distribute goods produced in the  country of origin. 
• Expenditure: the amount of money spent by noncommercial entities (families and  individuals). 
• Aggregate demand: the total amount of demand for all finished goods and  services produced in an economy. 
• Final good: a product that the final consumer uses or consumes. It does not  require any additional processing. 
• Gross output: the measure of total economic activity in the production of new  goods and services during an accounting period. 
• Labor income: the sum of employee compensation (wages and benefits) and  proprietor income. 
• Intermediate good: a product used to produce a final good. 
• Intermediate sale: the sale of intermediate goods used in the production of final  goods. 
• Noncommercial traffic: vehicles carrying passengers (tourists, workers, others)  that do not transport goods to sell in the destination country. 
11 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
The United States: Border Efficiency to Strengthen the Economy 
By John Byrd, John Gibson, Mayra Maldonado, and Roberto Ransom.  
University of Texas at El Paso’s Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness 
Improved border management and the implementation of new  
technologies at the US-Mexico border have the potential to  enhance border security and expedite legitimate trade and  travel, stimulating the US and Mexican economies. A more  
efficient border would allow more commercial and noncommercial  traffic to enter the United States from Mexico, resulting in additional  goods for US consumers and businesses and more shoppers  buying US goods and services. 
KEY TAKEAWAYS: 
A 10-minute reduction in wait times at the US-Mexico  border would: 
• Five-hundred thirty-two additional commercial vehicles  loaded with goods entering the United States from  Mexico every month would generate an additional  commercial intake of nearly $26 million monthly or  $312 million annually. The extra inventory resulting from  increased imports would reduce US domestic prices,  thus promoting economic well-being for US citizens. 
• Sixty-thousand two-hundred forty additional  noncommercial vehicles entering the United States  from Mexico every month would generate an additional  economic intake of $450,000 monthly, or $5.4 million  annually. Border states would absorb approximately  75 percent of this economic impact, and the other 25  percent would reach non-border states in the United  States. 
The Economic Impact of Additional  
Commercial Crossings 
In 2021, more than 4.7 million container trucks loaded with over  $345.9 million worth of cargo entered the United States from  Mexico via the US-Mexico border.22 Research shows that a one minute reduction in commercial wait times would result in 53  additional commercial crossings (see regression analysis in  Appendix B). This means that a 10-minute reduction in wait times  would result in approximately another 532 container trucks  entering the United States every month. 
These containers may be loaded or unloaded. Therefore,  estimating the economic impact of additional commercial crossings  would require determining the proportion of loaded containers  entering the United States via land ports of entry and the average  cargo value of loaded containers. Data from the US Bureau of  Transportation shows that approximately 73.1 percent of containers  crossing the US-Mexico border are loaded with an average value  of $66,798. Table 1 shows a breakdown of the average container  value and the number of loaded and unloaded containers crossing  the border through individual border counties.
12 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Table 1: Proportion of Loaded Containers and Average Container Value (2019) 
State 
	County
	Loaded  
Containers  2019
	Unloaded  Containers  2019
	Loaded +  Unloaded  Containers
	Exports  
2019
	Imports  
2019
	Total Trade  
2019
	Average  
Value  
per Truck
	Texas 
	El Paso 
	610,869 
	184,426 
	795,295
	 $31,717,503,019 
	$46,613,712,212 
	$78,331,215,231 
	$76,307 
	Texas 
	Hudspeth 
	0 
	0 
	0
	 $- 
	$- 
	$- 
	$- 
	Texas 
	Presidio 
	8,418 
	1,791 
	10,209
	 $144,896,195 
	$200,275,710 
	$345,171,905 
	$23,791 
	Texas 
	Val Verde 
	59,951 
	15,651 
	75,602
	 $2,068,951,047 
	$3,082,037,002 
	$5,150,988,049 
	$51,409 
	Texas 
	Maverick 
	149,732 
	30,298 
	180,030
	 $7,453,868,613 
	$22,197,870,144 
	$29,651,738,757 
	$148,251 
	Texas 
	Webb 
	1,711,670 
	658,639 
	2,370,309
	 $95,124,653,587 
	$135,741,587,991 
	$230,866,241,578 
	$79,304 
	Texas 
	Starr 
	38,611 
	17,958 
	56,569
	 $92,580,893 
	$387,724,994 
	$480,305,887 
	$10,042 
	Texas 
	Hidalgo 
	502,312 
	213,297 
	715,609
	 $13,222,562,811 
	$23,522,857,942 
	$36,745,420,753 
	$46,829 
	Texas 
	Cameron 
	153,280 
	134,796 
	288,076
	 $8,910,096,389 
	$8,930,388,221 
	$17,840,484,610 
	$58,262 
	New  
Mexico 
	Luna 
	15,960 
	794 
	16,754
	 $23,980,387 
	$116,358,933 
	$140,339,320 
	$7,291 
	New  
Mexico 
	Dona Ana 
	114,701 
	19,916 
	134,617
	 $14,098,068,953 
	$16,344,483,518 
	$30,442,552,471 
	$142,496 
	Arizona 
	Yuma 
	28,342 
	8,823 
	37,165
	 $506,644,995 
	$875,099,032 
	$1,381,744,027 
	$30,876 
	Arizona 
	Pima 
	303 
	12 
	315
	 $3,518,870 
	$1,794,662 
	$5,313,532 
	$5,923 
	Arizona 
	Santa Cruz 
	293,771 
	66,136 
	359,907
	 $10,369,174,240 
	$15,633,063,045 
	$26,002,237,285 
	$53,215 
	Arizona 
	Cochise 
	21,775 
	8,253 
	30,028
	 $802,531,798 
	$1,153,252,535 
	$1,955,784,333 
	$52,962 
	California 
	San Diego 
	798,230 
	258,912 
	1,057,142
	 $17,279,207,288 
	$32,480,486,882 
	$49,759,694,170 
	$40,691 
	California 
	Imperial 
	258,227 
	134,805 
	393,032
	 $7,023,568,716 
	$11,087,270,453 
	$18,110,839,169 
	$42,936 
	Total  
US Border 
	

	4,766,152 
	1,754,507 
	6,520,659 
	$208,841,807,801 
	$318,368,263,276 
	$527,210,071,077 
	Average 
$66,798 
	



SOURCE: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and the COLEF using data from the Department of Transportation  and the US Census Bureau.
Based on these findings, a 10-minute reduction in commercial wait  times would allow $26 million23 in additional cargo value to enter  the United States monthly or $312 million annually. This added  commerce from Mexico into the United States consists of various  finished and intermediate goods demanded by US consumers and  businesses. While it may be argued that additional consumer goods  entering the United States via the southern border would result  in fewer jobs in the United States, the extra inventory generated  by these other imports would also drive down domestic prices.  Furthermore, the inflow of intermediate goods serves as vital inputs  that support US businesses. As such, more data and analysis are  required to determine which of these offsetting effects dominate. 
The Economic Impact of Additional  
Noncommercial Crossings24 
Improvements in border management tools and practices could  also expedite the flow of noncommercial crossings, with positive  repercussions for the US economy due to additional cross border spending. In 2021, nearly 126 million people entered the  United States from Mexico to purchase goods and services from  US businesses. As shown in Table 2, these purchases generated  an economic impact of $12.3 billion for the US economy.25 While  the four US border states—Arizona, California, New Mexico, and  Texas—absorb 75 percent of this impact, approximately 25 percent  
13 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Table 2: Economic Impact of Cross-Border Spending in the United States (2022) Impact Employment Labor Income Value Added Output 
1 - Direct 2 - Indirect 3 - Induced 
60,619.16 
	$1,812,022,814.56 
	$2,765,047,740.91 
	$5,036,142,293.41 
	21,166.07 
	$1,234,825,927.30 
	$1,980,607,178.46 
	$4,118,866,436.04 
	18,648.05 
	$977,441,701.68 
	$1,771,486,445.19 
	$3,177,688,817.94 
	100,433.29 
	$4,024,290,443.54 
	$6,517,141,364.56 
	$12,332,697,547.38 
	



SOURCE: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and the COLEF, using IMPLAN. 
bleeds directly into non-border states. This means that spending by  shoppers from Mexico in US border states has an economic impact  of $3.1 billion in the other forty-six US states. 
Research finds that a 10-minute reduction in wait times at the  US-Mexico border would result in an average of approximately  5,020 additional noncommercial crossings every month, or 60,240  every year (see regression results in Appendix B). Determining the  economic impact of these additional crossings requires data on  the spending patterns of noncommercial crossers and a model to  assess the economic impact of this spending. Appendix C provides  
technical details on how the data and model were used to calculate  impact. 
Research shows that a 10-minute reduction in noncommercial wait  times at the US-Mexico border would lead to a $450,000 positive  economic impact on the US economy every month. Over the course  of one year, this would add up to a monetary intake of $5.4 million.  The top three industries that would most benefit from additional  cross-border spending is concentrated in areas where tourists or  temporary visitors are likely to spend money, particularly retail, full 
service restaurants, and general merchandise industries. For further  information on sector-specific impacts, see Appendix C. 
  
Trucks wait in a queue for border customs control, to cross into the United States, at the Zaragoza-Ysleta border crossing bridge in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico  April 30, 2020. REUTERS/Jose Luis Gonzalez 
14 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Mexico: The Potential Economic Gains of Border Efficiency 
By David Gaytan, Noé Arón Fuentes Flores, Alejandro Brugués Rodríguez, and Jorge Eduardo Mendoza Cota. El Colegio de la Frontera Norte 
KEY TAKEAWAYS:
A one-minute reduction in wait times at the US-Mexico border would: 
• Boost Mexican exports to the United States, increasing sectoral output by an average of  2 percent, intermediate sales by an average of 2.4 percent, and aggregate demand by an  average of 1.7 percent. Sectors benefiting the most from reduced commercial wait times are  those for which production is largely driven by US demand for export goods such as mining,  manufacturing, wholesale trade, and agriculture. 
A 10-minute reduction in wait times at the US-Mexico border would: 
• Create nearly 18,700 additional direct and indirect Mexican jobs. These posts would be largely  concentrated in financial services; wholesale trade; sports, cultural, and other recreational  services; and professional, scientific, and technical services. 
• Lead to an overall increase of $174,474 in labor income. 
Expediting the flow of commercial traffic from Mexico into  
the United States would boost cross-border commerce,  which impacts aggregate demand in Mexico, causing a  change in total gross output and intermediate sales.26 
These effects can be disaggregated by sector in the Mexican  economy. 
Macroeconomic Impact of Additional  
Commercial Crossings 
Determining the sectoral economic impact of a more efficient  US-Mexico border requires understanding the relationship  between Mexico’s exports per sector and US demand for export  goods. The United States stands as Mexico’s largest export market,  with approximately 80 percent of Mexican exports destined  for the United States.27 Nearly 100 percent of these exports are  concentrated in ten sectors,28 accounting for $349 billion in 2018  and $358 billion in 2019 (for more information, see Appendix F).29 Therefore, this study only considers Mexico’s top-ten sectors  in terms of exports to the United States. Within this group, the  manufacturing and maquiladora export industries are particularly  important, producing more than 60 percent of Mexico’s total exports  to the United States. Today, Mexico stands as the top US supplier of  motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts.30 
Findings show that, on average, Mexican exports to the United  States drive 38 percent of Mexican production (or output) per  sector (for a detailed breakdown, see Appendix F). For mining,  manufacturing, wholesale trade, and agriculture, exports to the  United States drive more than 50 percent of total gross output.  These four sectors alone are responsible for 84.4 percent of the  total dollar value generated from exports to the United States,  accounting for $664.26 billion out of the total $787.16 billion in total  production. 
A significant portion of Mexican exports enters the United States via  land ports across the US-Mexico border. An average of twenty-eight  commercial vehicles with export goods arrive at the border every  hour, with the average truck taking approximately 20 minutes to  cross the border (for more information, see Appendix D3). Reducing  wait times would boost Mexican exports by allowing additional  commercial crossings into the United States. This would strengthen  Mexican supply chains by stimulating the exchange of intermediate  and final goods between sectors in response to the increased  demand for export goods. 
Given that approximately 73.1 percent of containers crossing the  US-Mexico border are loaded with an average value of $66,798,31 a one-minute reduction in commercial wait times would increase  
15 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
sectoral output (total gross output) by an average of 2 percent. This  output growth would be driven by a 1.7 percent increase in average  demand per sector, occurring as a result of additional Mexican  exports entering the United States. Intermediate sales (the sectoral  exchange of intermediate goods for the production of additional  export goods) would grow by an average of 2.4 percent per sector.  Appendix D includes a detailed description of the two models used  in the analysis, a queuing and input-output model. 
As Figure 2 shows, the benefits of increased commercial crossings  into the United States are unequally distributed across sectors of  the Mexican economy. The mining, manufacturing, and wholesale  trade sectors experience the highest growth rates in production,  at 3.62 percent, 3.62 percent, and 3.33 percent, respectively.  These three sectors also have the largest increase in aggregate  demand, growing at 3.88 percent, 5.20 percent, and 3.63 percent,  respectively. Regarding intermediate sales, the agricultural and  mining sectors have growth rates higher than 3 percent. Appendix  F has a detailed breakdown of nominal and percentage growth in  production (total gross output), intermediate sales, and aggregate  demand following a one-minute reduction in border wait times. 
Economic Impact on Employment and Labor Income  of Additional Commercial Crossings 
Moreover, this study finds that a 10-minute reduction in border  wait times would promote the creation of nearly 18,700 indirect  and direct jobs in Mexico over the course of one year, with 5,505  new positions opening in financial and insurance services, 3,684  in mass media information, 3,216 in wholesale trade, and 2,448 in  professional, scientific, and technical posts. The loss in labor is far  smaller, with an estimated 793 jobs lost in manufacturing and 210 in  the transportation, postage, and warehousing sectors. (For detailed  analysis, see Appendix G). 
A ten-minute reduction in commercial wait times would also result in  a $174,474 increase in labor income. When disaggregated by sector,  labor income growth is higher in the wholesale trade, financial  and insurance services, information services, and mining sectors.  Interestingly, this change would lead to more equitable distribution  of labor income across Mexican economic sectors. However, the  variation is driven mainly by increased production by sector rather  than overall productivity. (For more information, see Appendix G). 
Figure 2: Growth of Total Gross Output, Aggregate Demand, and Intermediate Sales    Total Production Growth Aggregate Demand Growth Intermediate Sales GrowthSOURCE: In-house prepared graph based on estimates for 2018 data, obtained from the National Institute of Statistics and Geography, 2022. 
16 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Conclusion 
  
Trucks wait in a long queue for border customs control to cross into the United States at the World Trade Bridge in Nuevo Laredo, Mexico April 2, 2019.  REUTERS/Daniel Becerril
A more efficient US-Mexico border would expedite  
legitimate trade and travel, enhancing cross-border  commerce and benefiting the US and Mexican  economies. Streamlined border crossings could be  
achieved through improvements in border management practices  and the adoption of new technologies. These efforts would also  bolster shared security between the United States and Mexico. 
This report focused on the economic impact of expediting  commercial and noncommercial crossings from Mexico into the  United States. Reduced border wait times would increase the supply  of goods and services for US consumers and stimulate spending in  the United States while boosting Mexican exports into the United  States. This would lead to an increasingly competitive, economically  integrated, and resilient bilateral relationship. 
In the United States, a 10-minute reduction in border wait times  would facilitate the crossing of 532 additional loaded trucks every  month, generating an added commercial intake of nearly $26 million  per month. In one year, the economic impact on the US economy  would be $312 million. Similarly, it would allow 60,240 additional  noncommercial vehicles to enter the United States every month,  generating an extra economic intake of $450,000 monthly, or $5.4  million annually. The benefits of increased cross-border commerce  and spending would extend throughout the United States due to  the economic linkages between local economies. 
For Mexico’s top ten export sectors to the United States, a one minute reduction in commercial wait times would, on average,  increase production (total gross output) by 2 percent, intermediate  sales by 2.4 percent, and aggregate demand by 1.7 percent. Results  show the mining, manufacturing, wholesale trade, and agricultural  sectors would benefit the most from additional commerce from  Mexico into the United States. Historically, more than 50 percent  of production in these sectors has been driven by US demand for  export goods. 
Expediting the flow of commercial vehicles from Mexico into the  United States by ten minutes would increase labor income by  $174,474 and promote the creation of nearly 18,700 additional direct  and indirect jobs in Mexico, particularly in financial services; mass  media information; wholesale trade; and professional, scientific, and  technical services. 
These numbers illustrate the lower-bound economic gains  that would result from reduced wait times at the US-Mexico  border, stemming from potential improvements in border  management practices and tools. They emphasize the economic  interdependence of the United States and Mexico, outlining how  a further coordinated, binational approach to the border would  benefit both countries. A subsequent study will disaggregate  national-level findings and thus determine the impact of a more  efficient and secure US-Mexico border at the state and county level  in the United States and Mexico. 
17 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Methodology 
US-focused analysis 
The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness used a  
two-step process to calculate the economic impact  of reducing border wait times for commercial and  noncommercial crossings. First, regression analysis  
was employed to determine the relationship between average  wait times (in minutes) and the average number of crossings  (commercial and noncommercial) at major US-Mexico land ports  of entry. Additional factors impacting this relationship, such as  employment and crime on both sides of the border, the number  of lanes in operation, and total expenditures made by the US  Department of Homeland Security (DHS), were considered. The  analysis used data from various sources, including CBP, the US  Department of Transportation’s Bureau of Transportation Statistics,  the US Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, Instituto  Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI, or National Institute  of Statistics and Geography), and the Instituto Mexicano de  Seguro Social (Mexican Institute of Social Security). To account for  disruptions in border traffic patterns stemming from COVID-19 and  its accompanying policy changes, the study captures data between  April 2016 and December 2019, before the pandemic’s onset. 
The second step in the analysis was quantifying the economic  impact of additional crossings resulting from reduced wait times.  Because of the different types of data available for commercial  and noncommercial crossings; this study used various methods to  quantify their effects. For commercial crossings, the proportion of  loaded container crossings and the average value per container— 
obtained from the US Department of Transportation—were used  to determine the dollar value associated with increased container  crossings. For noncommercial crossings, survey data from the  City of El Paso’s International Bridges Department on travel and  spending patterns were used to model the economic impact of  spending by additional noncommercial crossers. Appendices A  through C include more technical information and a detailed, step 
by-step explanation of the analysis. 
Mexico-focused analysis 
El Colegio de la Frontera Norte used a three-step process and two  economic models to determine the economic impact of reduced  border wait times for commercial vehicles. The analysis used data  from the US Bureau of Transportation Statistics, CBP, the North  American Industry Classification System (NAICS), Mexico’s INEGI,  Automated Census Information System (ACIS), and Servicio de  Administración Tributaria (SAT, or Tax Administration Service). 
The first step was to estimate the average inspection rate of  commercial vehicles at US-Mexico border land ports of entry (see  Appendix D3 for detailed analysis). Then, a queuing model was  used to determine how reduced wait times affect Mexican exports to  the United States. Finally, an input-output model was implemented  to establish how changes in exports affect production (total gross  output), intermediate sales, and aggregate demand for Mexico’s  top ten sectors in terms of exports to the United States. Appendix D  provides a detailed, technical description of the queueing and input output models, while Appendix F includes analysis results.
18 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Appendices 
The following Appendices provide additional details on the economic analysis summarized in  the main report. Given its technical nature, this section can be skipped by more casual readers.  Appendices A, B, and C explain the US-focused analysis by the Hunt Institute for Global  Competitiveness and Appendices D, E, F, and G expand on the Mexico-focused analysis by El  Colegio de la Frontera Norte. 
US-FOCUSED ANALYSIS 
APPENDIX A 20 Provides a detailed description of the data used  
in the regression analysis. 
APPENDIX B 24 Outlines the regression model used to estimate  
the relationship between border wait times  
and commercial and noncommercial crossings. 
APPENDIX C 25 Gives an overview of IMPLAN and how it was used to  
measure the economic impact of noncommercial crossings. MEXICO-FOCUSED ANALYSIS 
APPENDIX D 28 Provides more details on the input-output  
and queuing models. 
APPENDIX E 31 Describes the data used in the analysis. 
APPENDIX F 32 Explains the economic impact analysis with  
and without reduced border wait times. 
APPENDIX G 36 Describes the analysis of economic impact  
on employment and labor income.
19 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX A
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
APPENDIX A: DATA USED FOR THE FIXED EFFECTS MODEL 
While report results are presented at the national level, the analysis  by the Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness is built from county level data focusing on major US-Mexico land ports of entry. Map 1  shows the counties on the US-Mexico border for which data was  
collected and analyzed. These counties have one or more land  ports of entry. Map 2 presents CBP sectors and selected counties’  ports of entry within each sector. 
Map 1. US Border Counties on the US-Mexico Border 
  
SOURCE: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and El Colegio de la Frontera Norte (COLEF). 
20 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX A 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER Map 2. CBP Sectors Along the US-Mexico Border 
  
SOURCE: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and COLEF using data from CBP. 
Table A1 lists every US county that touches the US-Mexico border.  
The list includes the name of every port of entry within that county,  
the names of the corresponding Mexican counties, and the CBP  
sector that contains that county.
21 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX A THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Table A1: US-Mexico Border States, Counties, Cities, Ports of Entry, Mexican Sister Cities, and CBP Sectors State County City PoE Sister City CBP Sector 
California 
Arizona 
New  
Mexico 
Texas
San Diego
	San Ysidro 
	San Ysidro
	Tijuana,  
Baja California
	San Diego Sector,  California 
	Otay Mesa
	Otay Mesa - Commercial
	Otay Mesa - Passenger
	Otay Mesa - Pedestrian Cross Border  Express
	Tecate 
	Tecate
	Imperial 
	Calexico 
	Calexico - East
	Mexicali,  
Baja California
	El Centro Sector,  
California 
	Calexico - West
	Andrade 
	Andrade
	Yuma 
	San Luis 
	San Luis - San Luis I 
	San Luis Rio Colorado,  Sonora 
	Yuma Sector, Arizona 
	San Luis - San Luis II
	Pima 
	Lukeville 
	Lukeville 
	Puerto Peñasco, Sonora 
	Tucson Sector,  
Arizona
	Sasabe 
	Sasabe 
	Sáric, Sonora
	Santa Cruz 
	Nobales
	Nogales - Deconcini
	Nogales, Sonora
	Nogales - Mariposa 
	Nogales - Morley Gate
	Cochise 
	Naco 
	Naco 
	Naco, Sonora
	Douglas 
	Douglas (Raul Hector Castro) 
	Agua Prieta, Sonora
	Luna 
	Columbus 
	Columbus 
	Asencion, Chihuahua 
	El Paso Sector, New  Mexico 
	Doña Ana 
	Santa Teresa 
	Santa Teresa - Santa Teresa Port of Entry 
	Ciudad Juarez,  
Chihuahua
	El Paso 
	El Paso
	El Paso - Bridge of the Americas (BOTA)
	Ciudad Juarez,  
Chihuahua 
	El Paso Sector, Texas
	El Paso - Paso del Norte (PDN)
	El Paso - Stanton DCL
	El Paso - Ysleta
	Hudspeth 
	Fort  
Hancock 
	Fort Hancock - Fort Hancock
	El Paso 
	Fabens 
	Fabens - Tornillo 
	Guadalupe, Chihuahua
	Presidio 
	Presidio 
	Presidio 
	Ojinaga, Chihuahua 
	Big Bend Sector,  
Texas
	Val Verde 
	Del Rio 
	Del Rio 
	Acuña, Coahuila
	Del Rio Sector, Texas 
	Maverick 
	Eagle Pass 
	Eagle Pass - Bridge I 
	Piedras Negras,  
Coahuila
	Eagle Pass - Bridge II 
	Webb 
	Laredo
	Laredo - Bridge I
	Nuevo Laredo,  
Tamaulipas 
	Laredo Sector, Texas
	Laredo - Bridge II
	Laredo - Colombia Solidarity
	Laredo - World Trade Bridge
	Starr 
	Roma 
	Roma 
	Ciudad Miguel Aleman,  Tamaulipas
	Rio Grande 
	Rio Grande City 
	Camargo, Tamaulipas
	Rio Grande Valley  Sector
	Hidalgo  
County
	Hidalgo/ 
Pharr
	Hidalgo/Pharr - Anzalduas International  Bridge
	Reynosa, Tamaulipas
	Hidalgo/Pharr - Hidalgo 
	Hidalgo/Pharr - PharrProgreso - Donna  International Bridge
	Hidalgo 
	Progreso 
	Progreso - Donna International Bridge 
	Rio Bravo, Tamaulipas 
	Progreso - Progreso International Bridge
	Cameron 
	Brownsville
	Brownsville - B&M
	Matamoros, Coahuila 
	Brownsville - Gateway
	Brownsville - Los Indios
	Brownsville - Veterans International 
	



SOURCE: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and El Colegio de la Frontera Norte (COLEF) using data from CBP. 
22 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX A
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Running the necessary regressions to determine the impact of  border wait times on border crossings requires data on several  variables in various geographies. The data gathered for the  regression analysis includes: 
1. Average wait times: Border wait times at ports of entry were  obtained from CBP. The research team used this data to estimate  the monthly average border wait time (in minutes) for every land  port of entry. This data was available for commercial vehicles,  personal vehicles, and pedestrian modes of crossing, but not for  rail crossings.32 Commercial vehicle data for the Hudspeth port of  entry were unavailable for this variable.33 
2. Total number of crossings per month: Data was captured from  the US Department of Transportation’s Bureau of Transportation  Statistics for each port of entry on the US-Mexico border and  mode of crossing (commercial vehicles, noncommercial vehicles,  and pedestrian crossings). The analysis uses these data to  estimate the total number of crossings per city and county. The  data for the Fort Hancock port of entry was unavailable for this  variable. 
3. Number of operational lanes per month: The total number of  operating lanes per hour per port of entry was taken from the  CBP for every port of entry. This analysis used the point of entry level data to estimate the number of operational lanes by city  and county. The research team estimated an hourly average for  every port of entry, using it to estimate a monthly average of the  number of lanes in operation per port of entry. The commercial  vehicles data for the Eagle Pass port of entry were not available  for this variable. 
4. Total number of existing lanes: The total number of existing  lanes for every port of entry was captured from CBP. Commercial  vehicle data for the Fort Hancock port of entry were unavailable  for this variable. 
5. Total employment (United States): The monthly data of total  non-farm employment information for each US county on the  US-Mexico border with ports of entry was obtained from the US  Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
6. Total employment (Mexico): The monthly data on total non-farm  employment for each of the Mexican counties on the US-Mexico  border with a port of entry was acquired from the Instituto  Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS or Mexico’s Institute of Social  Security). 
7. Illegal Apprehensions: CBP provided its complete monthly  number of illegal apprehensions for every sector within the  southern border. See Map 2 for the boundaries of each CBP  sector. This variable serves as a measure of crime in the United  States. 
8. Homicide rate: The total number of homicides per county was  obtained for every northern Mexican municipality from the  Secretariado Ejecutivo del Sistema Nacional de Seguridad  Publica (Mexico’s Executive Secretary of the National Public  Security System), the Mexican agency that compiles the total  number of homicides per county. Mexican population data is  available from two Mexican agencies, the Instituto Nacional  de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI or the National Institute  of Statistics and Geography) and the Consejo Nacional de  Población (CONAPO or the National Council on Population). This  variable serves as a measure of crime in Mexico. 
9. Federal Expenditures (United States): Federal costs data were  obtained for the following federal agencies: CBP, US Coast  Guard, Transportation Security Administration, Federal Law  Enforcement Training Center, and US Immigration and Customs  Enforcement. These expenses were gathered for the following  counties: San Diego and Imperial in California; Yuma, Pima,  Santa Cruz, and Cochise in Arizona; Luna and Doña Ana in New  Mexico; and El Paso, Presidio, Val Verde, Maverick, Webb, Starr,  Hidalgo, and Cameron in Texas. 
10. Trade: The data obtained from the US Trade Census consists  of the value of the total imports and exports that cross the  US-Mexico border ports of entry every month. 
23 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX B 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
APPENDIX B: FIXED EFFECTS MODEL 
Calculating the economic impact of a more efficient and secure  border, requires understanding the relationship between wait times  and the number of border crossings. 
The data across counties shows a low yet positive correlation  between noncommercial crossings and wait times, suggesting that  increased wait times are associated with more border crossings.34 This counterintuitive finding is explained by the fact that increased  border usage (or border congestion) results in both longer wait  times and more crossings. Therefore, to determine the underlying  relationship between border wait time and crossings, the research  team used an econometric model to control for other factors that  may influence border crossings. The following equation is estimated  by fixed effects using monthly county-level data from April 2016  through December 2019.35 
crossit = β1waitit + β2Xit+   i+uit ,t = 1,2, ..., T 
In the estimation equation, crossit and waitit denote the number of  crossings (either commercial or noncommercial) and average wait  times in county i at time t, respectively. All additional time-varying  explanatory variables are included in Xit, while   i denotes the time 
constant fixed effect for county i and uit denotes the error term.36 
The additional controls in Xit account for other factors influencing  crossings and include a measure of employment in the United  States and Mexico, a measure of crime in both countries, the number  (or proportion) of lanes in operation, total expenditures by DHS, and  a measure of trade (included in the commercial regression only). 
The left panel of Table B1 provides regression results for commercial  crossings, while the right panel shows results for noncommercial  crossings. The coefficient estimate on wait times is of primary  interest, which is negative and statistically significant in both  regressions. Specifically, the analysis found that a one-minute  reduction in wait times results in 53 additional commercial crossings  and 502 noncommercial crossings on average per month. 
The coefficient on wait times in the commercial crossing  regression is statistically significant at 10 percent. Each additional  commercial crossing represents another cargo container (loaded  or unloaded) crossing into the United States via a land port of entry.  The coefficient on wait times in the noncommercial crossings  regression is statistically significant at 5 percent. Each additional  noncommercial crossing represents a personal vehicle crossing  into the United States via a land port of entry. 
Regression results suggest an inverse relationship between wait  times and commercial and noncommercial border crossings.  Including additional time-varying controls and time-constant  fixed effects helped to reverse the counterintuitive finding of a  positive correlation reported above. As such, Table B1 describes  the underlying relationship between border wait times and  border crossings. These findings can be used to determine how  improved border management techniques or the adoption of  new technologies affect commercial and noncommercial border  crossings. 
Table B1: Fixed Effects Regression Results 
Regression Results


	Commercial Crossings 
	Noncommercial  Crossings
	Wait times
	-53.23* 
	-502.05**
	(30.34) 
	(227.18)
	Employment in US
	0.03 
	0.23
	(0.05) 
	(0.41)
	Employment in  
Mexico
	-0.01 
	0.05
	(0.02) 
	(0.17)
	Crime in US
	-0.03 
	-1.16***
	(0.04) 
	(0.43)
	Crime in Mexico 
	-17.60*** 
	-30.00
	(5.56) 
	(98.12)
	Lanes operational
	487.29 
	314031.50***
	(1998.54) 
	(68954.24)
	DHS Expenditures
	-0.002** 
	0.01
	(0.001) 
	(0.01)
	Trade
	8.92E-06*** 
	-
	(5.09E-07) 
	-
	Constant
	8307.01 
	268168.40***
	(6615.80) 
	(48439.59)
	Sample Size 
	554 
	585
	R^2 
	0.95 
	0.76
	



SOURCE: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and the COLEF,  using data from the US Department of Transportation. 
NOTE: The standard error is in parentheses. ***Statistically significant at 1  percent. **Statistically significant at 5 percent. *Statistically significant at  10 percent. 
24 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX C
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
APPENDIX C: ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF BORDER CROSSINGS 
The regression results presented in Appendix B established a link  between border wait times and commercial and noncommercial  crossings. This serves as the first step in understanding the  economic impact of reduced border wait times. Additional data is  needed to determine the economic impact of reductions in border  wait times. The following subsections explain the steps taken to  produce the economic impact results described in the main text. 
Appendix C1: Economic Impact of Commercial  Crossings 
The regression results described in Appendix B indicate that a  one-minute reduction in average commercial wait times results  in approximately fifty-three additional container crossings per  month. Data from the US Department of Transportation’s Bureau of  Transportation Statistics were used to estimate that approximately  73.1 percent of these containers would be loaded with an average  value of $66,798 (for a detailed breakdown of the proportion of  loaded containers crossing the US-Mexico border and their average  cargo value, see table 1 on page 13). This means that a 10-minute  reduction in wait times would result in 532 additional container  crossings, of which 388 would be loaded with $25,879,549 in cargo  value. 
Appendix C2: Economic Impact of Noncommercial  Crossings 
Individuals crossing from Mexico into the United States make  purchases on the US borders and in states, contributing to local  economies. Due to underlying economic linkages, this spending  has an amplified national impact. To estimate this impact, the  research team used IMPLAN—a regional economic impact  software—, data on expenditure patterns, and the average number  of border crossings aggregated to the county level. Below is an  overview of the data and model used to estimate the economic  impact of the expenditures that result from these noncommercial  border crossings. 
A 2019 study by the City of El Paso International Bridges Department  quantifies the social and economic cross-border activities from  vehicle and pedestrian crossings through the El Paso–Ciudad  Juárez port of entry. The study consisted of two surveys. First, a  short questionnaire administered to US-Mexico border crossers  between October 1 and December 31, 2019. Residents who  indicated Mexico as their primary place of residence received  an entry survey, while those indicating the United States as their  primary place of residence received an exit survey. The entry survey  captured the planned activities and expenditures of those traveling  to El Paso from Ciudad Juárez, while the exit survey captured the  activities and spending already made by those traveling to Ciudad  Juárez from El Paso. 
25 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX C
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Survey respondents were asked questions related to four  categories: 
• Demographics 
• Reasons for crossing 
• Anticipated spending (including the area of spending) • Trip characteristics 
This report focused on survey responses related to the intended  destination (El Paso or other) and expected spending across  various categories. The survey results indicate that approximately  80 percent of individuals crossing the border (by vehicle and  as pedestrians) remained in El Paso, while 20 percent continued  to another location. Of the 80 percent who stayed in El Paso,  approximately 64 percent of those who crossed by vehicle and 47  percent who crossed as pedestrians reported positive expected  expenditures. The survey data breaks down the dollar amount  individuals expected to spend within twenty categories.37 
This information was used to calculate the average expenditure  per crosser, for both vehicle and pedestrian crossings. These  expenditures were then scaled by the total number of vehicle and  pedestrian crossings in 2019 (after scaling by the proportion of  crossers who remained in El Paso and reported spending money)  to determine the average expenditure of crossings in 2019 for El  Paso County. 
To establish the economic impact of these expenditures at the  national level, the average expenditures by crossers in 2019 were  computed for the following border counties: 
• Texas: Presidio, Val Verde, Maverick, Webb, Starr, Hidalgo, and  Cameron 
• New Mexico: Luna and Doña Ana 
• Arizona: Yuma, Pima, Santa Cruz, and Cochise 
• California: San Diego and Imperial 
Unfortunately, detailed expenditure data were unavailable for the  other border counties. However, the El Paso survey was used with  the assumption that spending patterns across the twenty categories  do not change across counties. First, the average expenditures  per crosser for each category was recovered from the El Paso  survey. These expenditures were then scaled up or down based  on the average household income in the neighboring Mexican  state relative to the average household income in Chihuahua (the  Mexican state neighboring El Paso). Once this income adjustment  was made, the average 2019 expenditures were scaled by the  number of vehicle and pedestrian crossings in 2019 for each border  county listed above. This exercise reveals the total spending in  the twenty categories for each of the sixteen border counties  considered in the analysis.38 
These findings were used as inputs into IMPLAN to estimate the  economic impact of expenditures by individuals crossing the  US-Mexico border. First, the twenty expenditure categories from  the survey were mapped into comparable IMPLAN industries. Then,  industry output (spending) was reduced in these industries for each  of the sixteen counties. Twenty adverse output (spending) events  were modeled separately in the sixteen counties for a total of 320  events. The rest of the United States was then built up, county-by county for Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California; and state-by 
state for the non-border states. Finally, the national-level analysis  was run using IMPLAN’s multiregion input-output feature, allowing  for additional indirect linkages between regions within the analysis.  Tables C2.1 and C2.2 present the main findings. 
26 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX C 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Table C2.1: Economic Impact of Removing Cross-Border Spending in the United States (2022) 
Impact Employment Labor Income Value Added Output  
1 - Direct 2 - Indirect 3 - Induced 
-60,619.16
	 -$1,812,022,814.56
	 -$2,765,047,740.91
	 -$5,036,142,293.41
	-21,166.07
	 -$1,234,825,927.30
	 -$1,980,607,178.46
	 -$4,118,866,436.04
	-18,648.05
	 -$977,441,701.68
	 -$1,771,486,445.19
	 -$3,177,688,817.94
	 -100,433.29
	 -$4,024,290,443.54
	 -$6,517,141,364.56 
	-$12,332,697,547.38
	



 Source: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and the COLEF, using IMPLAN.
As shown on Table C2.1, removing cross-border spending by  noncommercial crossers results in approximately 100,433 fewer  jobs in the United States. Approximately 60 percent of this job  loss is directly caused by reduced expenditure. The remaining 40  percent is due to indirect and induced effects. Removing cross 
border spending would also result in a loss of $12,332,697,547 in  economic output. Approximately 41 percent of this output loss is  explained by the direct effects of reducing expenditures and 59  percent by indirect or induced effects. 
Table C2.2 includes the top five most impacted industries in terms  of output lost due to the reduction in cross-border spending  by noncommercial crossers. As expected, these industries are  concentrated in areas where tourists or temporary visitors would  
likely spend money. The three sectors with the largest output loss  include retail, full-service restaurants, and general merchandise.  As such, the entire output loss within these industries was due to  sectoral linkages with other areas experiencing direct impacts. 
IMPLAN results in Table C2 can be combined with the regression  results in Appendix B to determine the economic impact of reducing  noncommercial border wait times. The research team divided  the total output loss resulting from eliminating noncommercial  crossings by the total number of crossers in 2019, 87,812,443.39 This  yields a value of $140.44 which can be interpreted as the output  loss associated with losing one noncommercial crosser or the  output gain associated with one additional noncommercial crosser. 
Table C2.2: Top Five Industries with Reductions in Economic Output from Removing Cross-Border Spending in the United States (2022) Impact 1 - Direct 2 - Indirect 3 - InducedImpact output
Industry display 
	Impact output 
	Impact output 
	Impact output
	

	Retail: Clothing  
and ccessories 
	-$2,161,062,814.49 
	-$707,698.49 
	-$23,321,554.17 
	-$2,185,092,067.16
	Other real estate services 
	$0.00 
	-$740,224,149.66 
	-$130,392,264.37 
	-$870,616,414.03
	Full service restaurants 
	-$713,075,639.37 
	-$28,572,142.09 
	-$65,051,510.06 
	-$806,699,291.52
	General merchandise 
	-$575,957,329.13 
	-$2,040,513.78 
	-$36,955,115.99 
	-$614,952,958.90
	Management 
	$0.00 
	-$397,735,328.22 
	-$56,187,767.71 
	-$453,923,095.93
	



1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Source: The Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness and the COLEF, using IMPLAN. 
27 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX D
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
APPENDIX D: DESCRIPTION OF THE INPUT-OUTPUT AND QUEUING MODELS 
Appendix D1: The queueing model 
This study uses a queuing model to evaluate how wait times for  commercial vehicles at the US-Mexico border affect Mexican  exports to the United States. A queueing model mathematically  describes a queuing system, making specific assumptions about the  probabilistic nature of the number and type of servers (commercial  vehicles), the arrival and service processes (border processing  rates), and the queue discipline and organization. For this study, this  can be described as: 
E'j,t = E'j,0- ∆ %(λ-μ)*αj ∑ E'j,0 (1) 
Where; 
E'j,t = commercial vehicles processed per hour at t ≥1. E'j,0 = commercial vehicles processed per hour at t=0. λ = the average number of commercial vehicles arriving per hour.40 
μ = the average number of commercial vehicles dispatched per  hour.41 
α = the share of sectoral exports in total exports per hour (E'j,0 / ∑ E'j,0). 
∑ E'j,0 = the total number of commercial vehicles per hour in the  economy. 
The E'j,0 vector also serve as a measure of Mexican exports, given  that commercial vehicles entering the United States are loaded with  Mexican goods. 
In equation (1), the assigned volume is the number of commercial  vehicles arriving at a border checkpoint every hour (λ), while the  volume processed is the processing capacity of the checkpoint per  
hour (μ). To conduct the queuing analysis, these two variables must  be known beforehand. Appendix D3 shows how they were defined. 
Besides the variables λ and μ, the queuing model considers  other key variables, including the value of exports transported by  commercial vehicles and the number of lanes in operation. The  former was determined using data from the US Department of  Transportation’s Bureau of Transportation Statistics (see Appendix  C1), and the latter with data from CBP. Additionally, this study  considers the system in its steadystate of operation, i.e., during time  intervals when λ and μ behave normally. This means that anomalous  states of operation are removed from the analysis (such as the first  30 minutes in the workday when personnel perform preparatory  activities). 
As equation (1) shows, when the volume of commercial vehicles in  the system is processed immediately [(λ-μ) = 0], there would be  no queues. As a result, wait times would be insignificant, and the  value of Mexican exports entering the United States in commercial  vehicles would be E'j,0. However, when the assigned volume  of commercial vehicles is greater than the volume of vehicles  processed [(λ-μ) > 0], a queue forms, leading to increased wait  times and reducing the number of commercial vehicles crossing the  border with Mexican export goods (reducing E'j,t). This calculation  produces approximate wait times, which are sufficiently accurate to  understand the overall distribution of traffic between land ports of  entry across the US-Mexico border. 
Once approximate wait times are established, it is important to verify  the model’s validity. Using a chi-square goodness of fit test, the  observed distribution of the variables λ and μ is compared with their  theoretical distribution, demonstrating the degree of adjustment  between the sample (the average service rate for one checkpoint)  and the population (the average service rate for all checkpoints  across the US-Mexico border). This hypothesis test concludes, with  a certain degree of statistical significance, that the sample in this  study is representative of the full population. 
28 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX D
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Appendix D2: Intersectoral input-output model 
Input-output models are a form of macroeconomic analysis based  on the interdependencies (the flow of goods and services) between  different economic sectors. They are commonly used to estimate  the impacts of positive or negative economic shocks and their ripple  effects throughout an economy. 
This study uses an input-output model to determine how increased  Mexican exports stemming from reduced border wait times  (previously established using a queuing model; see Appendix  D1) affect aggregate demand in Mexico (calculated as aggregate  demand = C + I + G + Nx, where: C = consumer spending; I =  private investment and corporate spending; G = government  spending; and Nx = net exports (exports minus imports). 
Economic sectors respond to increases in aggregate demand  directly by supplying final goods (increasing output) or indirectly  by producing intermediate goods for sectors that respond directly  (increasing intermediate sales). Therefore, findings are then used  to calculate the impact on total gross output and intermediate sales  across sectors of the Mexican economy. 
Equation (2) estimates the impact of increased demand for Mexican  exports on output per sector: 
Xj,0= (I-A)-1Yj,0 (2) 
Where: 
Xj,0 = the total gross output vector per sector at t=0. 
(I-A)-1 = the Leontief inverse (or the matrix of indirect and direct  multipliers). In which I = identity matrix and A = technical coefficient  matrix. 
Yj,0 = the aggregate demand vector per sector at t=0. 
Therefore, equation (2) could be re-written as: 
Xj,0= (I-A)-1E'j,0 (3) 
Where: 
E'j,0 = the exports vector per sector at t=0. 
As discussed in Appendix D1, E'j,0 can be interpreted as “commercial  vehicles processed by the customs system every hour” and  equation (3) expressed as: 
Xj,t = (I-A)-1E'j,t (4) Where E'j,0 = commercial vehicles processed per hour at t ≥ 1. 
This interpretation makes two assumptions: (a) that the system  operates at full capacity and (b) that the volume of commercial  vehicles in the system is processed immediately [(λ-μ) = 0],  resulting in no wait times (see Appendix D1). In other words, the  input-output model is static. 
However, this is not always the case, given that commercial  vehicle arrivals and departures to and from border checkpoints  do not happen at fixed intervals (they are uncertain). Therefore,  by incorporating specific trajectories describing the behavior of  E'j,t (changes to the number of commercial vehicles processed by  customs checkpoints due to reduced wait times), the static input 
output model can be used to estimate the impact of increased  Mexican exports on total gross output per sector. This is calculated  with the equation: 
Lj,t = ∑ [Xj,t+Xj,0] (5) Where: 
Lj,t = the impact on total gross output. 
Xj,0 = the total gross output vector per sector at t=0 (before reduced  wait times and no changes to E'j,0). 
Xj,t = the total gross output vector per sector at t ≥1 (after reduced  wait times and changes to E'j,t). 
 j = 1- n sectors. 
29 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX D 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Appendix D3: Establishing the assigned volume and  processing rate of commercial vehicles 
Estimating the average processing capacity of a port of entry  requires data on the volume of commercial vehicles serviced and  the number of lanes, hours, and days in operation for that port of  entry. For land ports of entry across the US-Mexico border, these  data were obtained from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics’  Border Crossing Data.42 Table D3 shows data for the Otay Mesa  port of entry in Baja, California, the third-busiest on the US-Mexico  border.43 The Otay Mesa example helps to illustrate how processing  capacity was calculated for other ports of entry as part of this study. 
On average, one lane in the Otay Mesa port of entry operates 65  hours per week. Together, its ten lanes would operate 650 hours  per week, meaning that, together, the lanes of the Otay Mesa port  of entry operate for approximately 33,800 hours in one year (52  weeks). Given that 962,577 commercial vehicles are serviced per  
year, a total of 18,511 trucks would cross the border weekly. For one  lane, this translates to 1,851 trucks per week, 370 per day, and 28.5  per hour. 
Having established the number of commercial vehicles serviced per  hour (28.5 vehicles), an M/M/1 queue was simulated (see Appendix  D1) to estimate the average processing capacity (μ), showing that  border wait times for commercial vehicles are approximately 21.5  minutes.44 
Enhanced border management practices and the implementation of  new technologies would improve the processing capacity of ports  of entry, reduce commercial wait times, and allow more Mexican  exports to enter the United States. This would boost total gross  output, aggregate demand, and intermediated sales across various  sectors in the Mexican economy, as well as employment and labor  income (see Appendices F and G for input-output analysis results). 
Table D3: Data for the Otay Mesa Port of Entry
Item Value 
Total number of commercial vehicles serviced per year Hours in operation per day 
Days in operation per week 
Maximum number of lanes in operation 
962,577
	13
	5
	10
	



FUENTE: Cálculos propios con base en Información procedente de <https://bwt.cbp.gov/> y <Border Crossing/Entry  Data - Bureau of Transportation Statistics 
30 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX E 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
APPENDIX E: DATA USED FOR THE ANALYSIS 
This study relied on the North American Industry Classification  System (NAICS) and the Sistema Automatizado de Información  Censal (ACIS or Automated Census Information System) to further  understand Mexico’s productive sector and commercial relationship  with the United States. It also used data from the Instituto Nacional  de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI or the National Institute of  Statistics and Geography). 
The NAICS, jointly developed by the US Economic Classification  Policy Committee, INEGI, and Statistics Canada, classifies  North American business statistics, allowing for a high level of  comparability between economic activities in the United States,  Mexico, and Canada. The sectors shown in Table E1, classified by  NAICS in 2018, were used for this study. 
The INEGI used data from economic censuses in Mexico,  systematized in the ACIS,45 to produce an input-output matrix46 for the Mexican economy in 2013. It then used a RAS method to  estimate a matrix for 2018.47 The 2018 matrix was used as part of  this study to determine the top ten Mexican sectors exporting to  the United States, which were later used in the intersectoral input output analysis described in Appendix D2. Results on the economic  impact of reduced border wait times on sectoral output, aggregate  demand, and intermediate sales appear in Appendix F2. 
Additionally, the 2018 input-output matrix and vectors for  employment and labor income in Mexico were used to estimate  how reduced commercial wait times affect employment and labor  income, as shown in Appendix G. The vectors were calculated using  data from the ACIS. 
Table E: Sectoral Classification of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) (2018) 
NAICS Code Sector 
11 
	Agriculture, animal breeding and exploitation, forestry, fishing and hunting
	21 
	Mining
	22 
	Electric power generation, transmission and diffusion, water and gas supply  through pipelines to final consumers
	23 
	Construction
	31-33 
	Manufacturing industries
	43 
	Wholesale trade
	46 
	Retail trade
	48-49 
	Transportation, postage, and warehousing
	51 
	Mass media information
	52 
	Financial and insurance services
	53 
	Real estate and rental services of personal and intangible property
	54 
	Professional, scientific, and technical services
	55 
	Corporate
	56 
	Business support services and waste and residue management and remediation  services
	61 
	Educational services
	62 
	Health and social welfare services
	71 
	Cultural, sports, and other recreational services
	72 
	Temporary accommodation services and food and beverage preparation services
	81 
	Other services, except government activities.
	93 
	Legislative, governmental, law enforcement, and international and extraterritorial  organization activities
	



SOURCE: The Colegio de la Frontera Norte using the 2018 sectoral classification of the NAICS
31 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX F 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
APPENDIX F: ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF BORDER CROSSINGS 
This study first established a baseline of Mexican exports to the  
United States without reduced wait times, which allowed for the  
determination of the top ten sectors exporting to the United States  
and the effect that exports have on sectoral output in Mexico. Then,  
an analysis with reduced border wait times was conducted, and  
baseline results were compared with new findings to determine  
the relative and absolute variation in sectoral output, aggregate  
demand, and intermediate sales stemming from reduced wait  
times. The values in all Appendix F tables appear in 2018 US dollars,  
using a conversion rate of 1 US dollar to 20.03 Mexican pesos.  
Results have yet to be adjusted to 2022 values, using inflation and  
consumer price index (CPI) historical data from the United States. 
Appendix F1: Analysis without reduced border wait  
times 
Assessing the economic impact of a one-minute reduction in border  
wait times requires understanding the US-Mexico commercial  
relationship and how it drives sectoral output in Mexico. As shown  
in Figure F1, ten sectors produced 99.86 percent of total Mexican  
exports to the United States in 2018. Therefore, this study considers  
these ten sectors. 
Figure F1: Top Ten Mexican Sectors in Terms of Exports to the United States (2018) 
• 31-33 - Manufacturing 
0.82% 
• 43 - Wholesale trade 
• 21 - Mining 
• 48-49 - Transportation, postage, and warehousing  • 46 - Retail trade 
• 11 - Agriculture, animal breeding and exploitation,  forestry, fishing, and hunting  
• 52 - Financial and insurance services  
• 22 - Electric power generation, transmission  and diffusion, and water and gas supply through  pipelines to final consumers  
• 51 - Mass media information 
• 54 - Professional, scientific, and technical services  
SOURCE: In-house, prepared using 2018  
using data obtained from INEGI (2022). 
1.92% 
3.97% 
6.30% 
6.81% 
16.80% 
0.05% 
0.05%
0.02% 
63.24% 
32 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX F
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
The input-output analysis was employed to estimate the baseline  output per sector driven by Mexican exports to the United States,  using equation (3) in Appendix D2 [Xj,0 = (I-A)-1E'j,0]. Table F1  
includes results in relative and absolute terms, showing that, on  average, Mexican exports to the United States drive 38 percent of  total gross output per sector in Mexico. 
Table F1: Total Gross Output (TGO) Driven by Mexican Exports to the United States (2018)48 NAICS  
classification  code 
Sector Total Percentage 


21 
	Mining 
	976,753.75 
	68.91%
	31-33 
	Manufacturing 
	9,992,494.79 
	68.79%
	43 
	Wholesale trade 
	1,724,997.69 
	63.26%
	11 
	Agriculture, animal breeding and  
exploitation, forestry, fishing, and hunting 
	630,344.07 
	50.86%
	22
	Electric power generation, transmission  and diffusion, and water and gas supply  through pipelines to final consumers 
	234,304.63 
	31.91%
	48-49 
	Transportation, postage, and warehousing 
	682,499.14 
	27.21%
	54 
	Professional, scientific,  
and technical services 
	155,642.26 
	26.37%
	46 
	Retail trade 
	477,034.24 
	17.72%
	52 
	Financial and insurance services 
	185,136.92 
	13.40%
	51 
	Mass media information 
	79,296.98 
	12.22%
	Total 
	15,138,504.47 
	380.65%
	Average 
	1,513,850.45 
	38.07%
	



SOURCE: In-house, prepared estimates based on estimates for 2018 using data obtained from INEGI (2022). 
33 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX F
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Appendix F2: Analysis with reduced wait times 
A second input-output analysis was performed to determine how  the positive economic shock (increased Mexican exports caused  by reduced border wait times) affected total gross production per  sector (Xj,t). This is estimated using equation (4) in Appendix D2  [Xj,t= (I-A)-1E'j,t], where E'j,t is the exports vector and j the number  of sectors. 
Given the interdependencies between sectors, the economic  impact of reduced border wait times spreads throughout productive  sectors in the Mexican economy. Therefore, results show the  average percentage increase in output, aggregate demand, and  final sales per sector driven by additional Mexican exports to the  United States (caused by a one-minute reduction in border wait  times). Table F2.1 shows findings in terms of total gross output, while  Tables F2.2 and F2.3 include results for aggregate demand and  intermediate sales, respectively. 
NAICS  
Table F2.1: Growth in Total Gross Output (TGO)49 
Total Gross Output 
Classification Sectors
code
	

	Absolute (TGO) 
	Change driven by  Mexican exports 
	Percentage  
increase
	11 
	Agriculture, animal breeding and exploitation,  forestry, fishing, and hunting 
	61,870,394,408.39 
	63,525,716,328.93 
	2.68%
	21 
	Mining 
	70,768,853,919.12 
	73,333,868,768.35 
	3.62%
	22
	Electric power generation, transmission and  diffusion, and water and gas supply through  pipelines to final consumers
	36,661,826,110.83 
	37,277,124,334.51 
	1.68%
	31-33 
	Manufacturing industries 
	725,175,223,165.25 
	751,416,123,114.45 
	3.62%
	43 
	Wholesale trade 
	136,148,265,851.22 
	140,678,214,854.59 
	3.33%
	46 
	Retail trade 
	134,388,874,388.42 
	135,641,595,360.59 
	0.93%
	48-49 
	Transportation, postage, and warehousing 
	125,222,060,808.79 
	127,014,345,127.69 
	1.43%
	51 
	Mass media information 
	32,404,278,182.73 
	32,612,516,876.33 
	0.64%
	52 
	Financial and insurance services 
	68,962,248,726.91 
	69,448,429,551.32 
	0.70%
	54 
	Professional, scientific, and technical services 
	29,468,317,923.12 
	29,877,043,990.12 
	1.39%
	

	Average 
	142,107,034,348.48 
	146,082,497,830.69 
	2.00%
	



SOURCE: In-house, prepared estimates based on estimates for 2018 using data obtained from INEGI (2022). 
34 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX F 
NAICS  
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Table F2.2: Growth in intermediate sales50 
Intermediate Sales
Classification Sectors
code
	

	Absolute  
intermediate sales
	Change driven by  Mexican exports
	Percentage  
increase
	11 
	Agriculture, animal breeding and exploitation,  forestry, fishing, and hunting 
	37,715,987,831.23 
	39,017,404,257.82 
	3.45%
	21
	 Mining 
	38,319,742,304.75 
	39,627,221,214.17 
	3.41%
	22
	Electric power generation, transmission and  diffusion, and water and gas supply through  pipelines to final consumers
	26,093,440,432.45 
	26,698,820,186.23 
	2.32%
	31-33 
	Manufacturing industries 
	500,578,423,695.96 
	515,136,851,491.74 
	2.91%
	43 
	Wholesale trade 
	50,588,439,711.28 
	52,014,146,106.25 
	2.82%
	46 
	Retail trade 
	20,372,948,351.47 
	20,891,889,251.96 
	2.55%
	48-49 
	Transportation, postage, and warehousing 
	27,507,131,659.31 
	28,135,165,832.62 
	2.28%
	51 
	Mass media information 
	14,218,572,797.10 
	14,418,468,679.28 
	1.41%
	52 
	Financial and insurance services 
	23,171,318,014.63 
	23,506,746,665.51 
	1.45%
	54 
	Professional, scientific, and technical services 
	27,550,006,467.55 
	27,955,133,873.68 
	1.47%
	Average 
	76,611,601,126.57 
	78,740,184,755.93 
	2.41%
	



SOURCE: In-house, prepared estimates based on estimates for 2018 using data obtained from INEGI (2022). 
Table F2.3: Growth in final demand51 
NAICS  
Classification Sectors
Final demand 


code
	

	Absolute aggregate  demand
	Change driven by  Mexican exports
	Percentage  
increase
	11 
	Agriculture, animal breeding and exploitation,  forestry, fishing, and hunting 
	24,154,406,577.15 
	24,508,312,071.11 
	1.47%
	21 
	Mining 
	32,449,111,614.37 
	33,706,647,554.19 
	3.88%
	22
	Electric power generation, transmission and  diffusion, and water and gas supply through  pipelines to final consumers
	10,568,385,678.38 
	10,578,304,148.28 
	0.09%
	31-33 
	Manufacturing industries 
	224,596,799,469.30 
	236,279,271,622.71 
	5.20%
	43 
	Wholesale trade 
	85,559,826,139.94 
	88,664,068,748.35 
	3.63%
	46 
	Retail trade 
	114,015,926,036.95 
	114,749,706,108.63 
	0.64%
	48-49 
	Transportation, postage, and warehousing 
	97,714,929,149.48 
	98,879,179,295.07 
	1.19%
	51 
	Mass media information 
	18,185,705,385.62 
	18,194,048,197.05 
	0.05%
	52 
	Financial and insurance services 
	45,790,930,712.28 
	45,941,682,885.81 
	0.33%
	54 
	Professional, scientific, and technical services 
	1,918,311,455.57 
	1,921,910,116.43 
	0.19%
	Average 
	65,495,433,221.90 
	67,342,313,074.76 
	1.67%
	



SOURCE: In-house, prepared estimates based on estimates for 2018 using data obtained from INEGI (2022). 
35 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX G 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
APPENDIX G: ECONOMIC IMPACT ON EMPLOYMENT AND LABOR INCOME 
Appendix G1: Employment 
The effect of a 10-minute reduction in commercial wait times on  direct employment in Mexico was estimated using the multiplier:  
l= LT [diag(X)-1] (6) Where: 
l = the direct employment coefficient 
LT = the employment generated per sector52 
[diag(X)-1] = the diagonal matrix of total gross output (obtained via  the input-output model) 
To assess the impact on direct and indirect employment, the direct  employment coefficient (l) is multiplied by the Leontief inverse: 
MED-1 = l[(I-A)-1] (7) 
Table G1 shows the original jobs per sector and the new jobs  created as a result of increased exports following a 10-minute  reduction in commercial wait times. It also includes the difference  between these two values and the relative increase and net  variation in employment. Results show that 18,697 jobs would be  created in one year. 
NAICS  
Classification  code 
Table G1: Impact on Direct and Indirect Employment of a More Efficient US-Mexico Border 
Sectores Original New Difference Relative  Increase 
Net  
Variation


11 
	Agriculture, animal breeding and ex ploitation, forestry, fishing, and hunting 
	5.9 
	6.6 
	0.7 
	0.3% 
	748.2
	21 
	Mining 
	5.9 
	8.1 
	2.2 
	1.2% 
	2,220.1
	22
	Electric power generation, transmis sion and diffusion, and water and  gas supply through pipelines to final  consumers
	7.4 
	7.5 
	0.1 
	0.1% 
	129.3
	31-33 
	Manufacturing industries 
	13.6 
	12.8 
	-0.8 
	0.0% 
	-793.1
	43 
	Wholesale trade 
	8.4 
	11.6 
	3.2 
	0.2% 
	3,216.0
	46 
	Retail trade 
	24.7 
	26.4 
	1.7 
	0.0% 
	1,748.8
	48-49 
	Transportation, postage, and ware housing 
	10.3 
	10.1 
	-0.2 
	0.0% 
	-210.3
	51 
	Mass media information 
	12.0 
	15.7 
	3.7 
	1.0% 
	3,684.5
	52 
	Financial and insurance services 
	10.1 
	15.6 
	5.5 
	0.8% 
	5,505.5
	54 
	Professional, scientific, and technical  services 
	18.6 
	21 
	2.4 
	0.3% 
	2,448.6
	Total 
	116.9 
	135.4 
	18.5 
	3.9% 
	1,8697.6
	Average 
	11.7 
	13.5 
	1.9 
	0.4% 
	1,869.8
	



SOURCE: In-house prepared estimates based on estimates for 2018 using data obtained from INEGI (2022). 
36 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
APPENDIX G 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Appendix G2: Labor income 
The effect of a 10-minute reduction in commercial wait times on  labor income in Mexico was estimated using a two-step process.  First, the labor income coefficient was determined with the  equation: 
r= RemT [diag(X)-1] (8) Where: 
r = the labor income coefficient 
RemT = the labor income per sector 53 
[diag(X)-1] = the diagonal matrix of total gross output 
Second, the labor income coefficient (r) was multiplied by the  Leontief inverse: 
MRemD-1 =r[(I-A)-1] (9) 
Table G2 shows the direct and indirect effects on labor income  of increased Mexican exports to the United States stemming  reductions in commercial wait times. It includes labor income per  sector before reduced wait times (original), labor income after  reduced wait times (new), the difference between these two values,  and the relative increase and net variation in labor income. Results  show that, overall, labor income would increase by $17,474 with a  one-minute reduction in border wait times or $174,474 with a ten minute reduction. 
NAICS  
Table G2: Impact on Labor Income of a More Efficient US-Mexico Border One-minute  
10-minute  
Relative  
Classification  code 
Sector Original New Difference 
reduction in  wait times 
reduction in  wait times 
weight 


Agriculture, animal  
breeding and exploita tion, forestry, fishing, and  hunting
	0.04 
	0.05 
	0.01
	 $ 324.72
	 $3,247.21 
	Mining 
	0.10 
	0.15 
	0.05
	 $ 2,643.81
	 $26,438.14 
	Electric power genera tion, transmission and  diffusion, and water and  gas supply through pipe lines to final consumers
	0.08 
	0.09 
	0.01
	 $ 711.73
	 $7,117.31 
	Manufacturing industries 
	0.14 
	0.15 
	0.01
	 $ 467.19
	 $4,671.91 
	Wholesale trade 
	0.08 
	0.16 
	0.08
	 $ 3,852.29
	 $38,522.90 
	Retail trade 
	0.09 
	0.13 
	0.04
	 $ 1,766.03
	 $17,660.32 
	Transportation, postage,  and warehousing 
	0.10 
	0.10 
	0.00
	 $ (89.37)
	 $(893.65) 
	Mass media information 
	0.17 
	0.23 
	0.06
	 $ 2,895.81
	 $28,958.10 
	Financial and insurance  services 
	0.16 
	0.23 
	0.07
	 $ 3,574.24
	 $35,742.39 
	Professional, scientific,  and technical services 
	0.14 
	0.17 
	0.03
	 $ 1,327.86
	 $13,278.59 
	Total
	

	

	

	 $ 17,474.32
	 $174,743.23
	



111.9% 21 15.1% 
224.1% 
31-33 2.7% 43 22.0% 46 10.1% 
48-49 -0.5% 51 16.6% 52 20.5% 
54 7.6% 
Average $ 1,747.43 $17,474.32
SOURCE: In-house prepared estimates based on estimates for 2018 using data obtained from INEGI (2022). 
37 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Acknowledgments 
This report was informed by roundtables, focus groups, and  consultations carried out in the United States and Mexico and the  analysis of economic data. We thank the many individuals and  institutions who participated in project activities and research  efforts. It was a true pleasure to work with our partners at the  University of Texas at El Paso’s (UTEP’s) Hunt Institute for Global  Competitiveness and Colegio de la Frontera Norte (COLEF). 
We are deeply grateful to the Adrienne Arsht Latin America  Center (AALAC) team, who worked tirelessly to produce this  report, particularly to Camila Hernández and Ignacia Ulloa, who  provided invaluable writing and editorial support. Thank you to  Jason Marczak, senior director for AALAC, and Maria Fernanda  Bozmoski, deputy director for programs, for their guidance and  editorial support. 
We thank AALAC Non-Resident Fellow Bosco Martí and the  Global Nexus team, specifically Ruben Olmos, Ana Margarita  Martínez, and Alejandro Vales, for providing crucial expertise  and contributions. Our gratitude extends to Rhonda Shore for her  diligent editorial work and to Donald Partyka and Anais Gonzalez  for their exceptional design skills. 
Most importantly, we thank the US Department of State’s Bureau  for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs for giving  the Atlantic Council, UTEP, and COLEF the opportunity to produce  this report in service of daily border users and strengthening the  US and Mexican economies.
38 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
Endnotes 
1 Government of the United States, “Trade in Goods with Mexico,” US Census Bureau, accessed August 16, 2022,  
https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c2010.html; and Government of the United States, “Monthly U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services, June 2022,”  US Census Bureau and US Department of Commerce, August 4, 2022, https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/current_press_release/ft900.pdf. 2 Government of the United States, “Overview of US- North American Freight by Port, Commodity Group, and Mode - Value (in Millions),” US Department of Transportation,  accessed August 16, 2022, https://explore.dot.gov/views/Dashboard_PortbyCommodity/Overview?%3Aembed=y&%3Aiid=1&%3AisGuestRedirectFromVizportal=y. 3 Government of Mexico, “US-Mexico Trade Relation,” Embassy of Mexico to the United States of America, Section of Economic Affairs, February 2022,  https://embamex.sre.gob.mx/eua/images/stories/economicos/2022/documents/US-MX_Trade_Website_02-2022.pdf. 
4 Government of Mexico, Secretariat of Foreign Affairs, Embassy of Mexico to the United States of America, Office of Political Affairs. Information acquired September 8, 2022. 5 Government of the United States, “Mexico: US-Mexico Trade Facts,” Office of the US Trade Representative,  
accessed August 14, 2022, https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/americas/mexico. 
6 Joint Statement by President Biden and President Lopez Obrador, The White House, July 12, 2022,  
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/07/12/president-biden-and-president-lopez-obrador-joint-statement/. 7 The US-Mexico High-Level Economic Dialogue is an opportunity for Mexico and the United States to advance strategic economic and commercial  priorities to foster economic development and growth, job creation, and global competitiveness and reduce poverty and inequality. 
8 Government of the United States, “Mexico: US-Mexico Trade Facts,” US Trade Representative, accessed August 16, 2022, https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/americas/mexico. 9 Zahniser, Stephen. “COVID-19 Working Paper: U.S.-Mexico Agricultural Trade in 2020,” United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. January, 2022. 10 Michoacán, Mexico, exports approximately 80 percent of its avocado supply directly to the United States. Government of the United States,  
“Fresh Avocado Imports from Mexico Resume,” Animal and Plant Inspection Service, United States Department of Agriculture, accessed  August 20, 2022. https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/newsroom/stakeholder-info/sa_by_date/sa-2022/avocado-imports-mexico. 
11 Ibid 
12 Government of the United States, “Hourly Wait Times Trends vs Current,” Customs and Border Protection,  
accessed August 17, 2022, https://bwt.cbp.gov/details/09250401/POV. 
13 Unified Cargo Processing is a program for joint inspection of northbound cargo via free and secure trade lanes. John Davis, “U.S. and Mexico United  in Cargo Processing,” US Customs and Border Protection, last modified January 4, 2022, https://www.cbp.gov/frontline/cargo-processing.. 14 Global Entry and the Secure Electronic Network for Travelers Rapid Inspection are risk-based programs that allow expedited clearance for pre-approved, low-risk  travelers upon arrival in the United States. Government of the United States, “Global Entry: Trusted Traveler Program Enrollment,” US Customs and Border Protection,  last modified September 6, 2022, https://www.cbp.gov/travel/trusted-traveler-programs/global-entry; and Government of the United States, “Secure Electronic Network  for Travelers Rapid Inspection,” US Customs and Border Protection, last modified January 4, 2022, https://www.cbp.gov/travel/trusted-traveler-programs/sentri. 15 The Customs Trade Partnership Against Terrorism is a voluntary supply chain security partnership used by the public and private  
sectors. Government of the United States, “CTPAT: Customs Trade Partnership Against Terrorism,” US Customs and Border  
Protection, last modified August 29, 2022, https://www.cbp.gov/border-security/ports-entry/cargo-security/CTPAT. 
16 “SENTRI Program Requirements,” Immigration Passport Visa Service, accessed August 17, 2022, http://immigrationpassportvisa.com/travel/sentri-pass program-requirements/#:~:text=Over%20175%2C000%20US%20citizens%20and%20Mexican%20citizens%20have%20become%20card%20holders. 17 The Maquiladora Export Industry is a conglomerate of intermediate-good manufacturing companies. 
18 According to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), a classification scheme for Mexican productive activities that dates to 1993 and  collects information on businesses, households, and individuals. In the development of this study, the consortium also referred to the Automated Census  Information System (ACIS), which allowed for adjustments and specifications of data. For additional information on NAICS and ACIS, see Appendix G. 19 Vehicle and Cargo Inspection System (VACIS) and Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA). 
20 The Interagency Border Inspection System is a computer-based system that provides law enforcement access to  
drivers’ criminal records and other information used to screen vehicles crossing the border. 
21 Border users were consulted during roundtables hosted by the Atlantic Council. The first took place on May 10, 2022, in  
El Paso, Texas, in collaboration with the Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness at the University of Texas at El Paso. The  
second occurred on July 12, 2022, in Tijuana, Mexico, in collaboration with El Colegio de la Frontera Norte. 
22 According to research by the Hunt Institute for Global Competitiveness, 4,720,967 container trucks crossed the border in 2021. 
23 A 10-minute reduction in commercial wait times would allow $25,879,549 million, specifically in additional cargo  
value, to enter the United States monthly. See Appendix C1 for more information. 
24 This section focuses on crossings by individuals and families in noncommercial vehicles alone. Migrant caravans at the US-Mexico border disrupted standard  pedestrian crossing patterns during the sample period, preventing the analysis of pedestrian traffic using the regression model described in Appendix  B. Further research is needed to estimate the economic impact of additional pedestrian crossings following a reduction in border wait times. 
25 Per Table 2, these purchases generated an economic impact of $12,332,697,547 for the US economy. The economic impact of cross-border  spending was determined by mapping out expenditure categories and running INPLAN’s multi-region input-output feature. 
26 Given the nature of available data for the input-output analysis (macroeconomic data from Mexico’s National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI), which captures the  commercial relationship between the United States and Mexico), this section exclusively focuses on commercial crossings from Mexico into the United States. The economic  impact for Mexican families and workers was estimated by considering how changes in the US-Mexico commercial relationship affect employment and labor income. 
27 Government of the United States, “U.S.-Mexico Trade Relations,” Congressional Research Service, updated April 25, 2021, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/IF11175.pdf. 28 The ten sectors are mining; manufacturing; wholesale trade; agriculture, animal breeding and exploitation, forestry, fishing, and  
hunting; electric power generation, transmission and diffusion, and water and gas supply; transportation, postage, and warehousing;  
professional, scientific, and technical services; retail trade; financial and insurance services; and mass media information. 
29 “U.S.-Mexico Trade Relations,” Congressional Research Service. https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/IF11175.pdf 
30 “México supera a Japón y lidera por primera vez envíos de autos a Estados Unidos” (“Mexico surpasses Japan and leads car shipments to the United States for  the first time”), El Economista, September 5, 2022, https://dfsud.com/america/mexico-supera-a-japon-y-lidera-por-primera-vez-envios-de-autos-a-estados. 31 See Appendix C1. 
32 As described in the report, the regression analysis did not include pedestrian crossings due to the impact of migrant caravans during the period under study.
39 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF A MORE EFFICIENT US-MEXICO BORDER 
33 Missing data was excluded from averages. 
34 The correlation between wait times and crossings is 0.2977. This is likely because congestion at the border  
may result in both increased wait times and a higher number of crossings. 
35 The sample ends prior to 2020 to avoid disruptions in border crossings due to COVID-19. See Appendix A for a detailed description of the data. 36 The fixed effect,   i, accounts for time-constant heterogeneity between counties in the analysis. Estimating the regression equation by fixed effects removes this time-constant  heterogeneity, effectively controlling for the immutable differences between counties. 
37 Spending categories include clothing, general merchandise, auto parts, groceries, electronics, restaurants, gas, sports and music, building, furniture, personal care services,  fast food, health, business and other professional services, amusement and recreation, accommodation, bar, theater, transportation and parking, and other products. 38 The sixteen counties used in the analysis were El Paso, Presidio, Val Verde, Maverick, Webb, Starr, Hidalgo,  
Cameron, Luna, Dona Ana, Yuma, Pima, Santa Cruz, Cochise, San Diego, and Imperial. 
39 The total number of crossers was determined using data from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 
40 This could also be the average arrival rate. 
41 This could also be the average service rate. 
42 Government of the United States, “Bureau of Transportation Statistics: Border Crossing/Entry Data,” US Department of Transportation, accessed August 18, 2022,  https://www.bts.gov/browse-statistical-products-and-data/border-crossing-data/border-crossingentry-data#:~:text=Border%20 
crossing%20data%20are%20collected,comparable%20data%20on%20outbound%20crossings.. 
43 Scott Mall, “FreightWaves Classics: Otay Mesa Land Port is third-busiest on U.S.-Mexico border,” Freightwaves, May 12, 2021,  
https://www.freightwaves.com/news/freightwaves-classics-otay-mesa-land-port-is-third-busiest-on-us-mexico-border. 
44 Ports of entry with extremely atypical wait times (anomalies) were disregarded in this paper’s analysis. 
45 The ACIS systematizes information from Mexico’s four most recent economic censuses, which occurred in 2019, 2014, 2009, and 2004. 46 An input-output matrix represents national or regional economic accounting that records how industries trade with one another and produce for consumption and investments. 47 The RAS method is an interactive method for data reconciliation. It scales an input-output table bi-proportionally to achieve consistency between  
given row and column sums. For a detailed description of the methodology used by INEGI, see “Matrices de Contabilidad Social de México: Fuentes  y metodología,” INEGI, accessed August 18, 2022, https://inegi.org.mx/contenidos/investigacion/mcsm/doc/fuente_y_metodologia.pdf. 48 Originally in 2018 Mexican pesos and converted to US dollars using a conversion rate of 1 US dollar to 20.03 Mexican pesos. Results are in 2018 values. 49 Originally in 2018 Mexican pesos and converted to US dollars using a conversion rate of 1 US dollar to 20.03 Mexican pesos. Results are in 2018 values. 50 Originally in 2018 Mexican pesos and converted to US dollars using a conversion rate of 1 US dollar to 20.03 Mexican pesos. Results are in 2018 values. 51 Originally in 2018 Mexican pesos and converted to US dollars using a conversion rate of 1 US dollar to 20.03 Mexican pesos. Results are in 2018 values. 52 Total employment per sector was obtained from INEGI, using 2018 data. 
53 Total labor income per sector was obtained from INEGI, using 2018 data in Mexican pesos (millions).
40 ATLANTIC COUNCIL 
CHAIRMAN 
*John F.W. Rogers 
EXECUTIVE  
CHAIRMAN  
EMERITUS 
*James L. Jones 
PRESIDENT ANDCEO *Frederick Kempe 
EXECUTIVE VICE  CHAIRS 
*Adrienne Arsht 
*Stephen J. Hadley 
VICE CHAIRS 
*Robert J. Abernethy *C. Boyden Gray 
*Alexander V. Mirtchev 
TREASURER 
*George Lund 
DIRECTORS 
Todd Achilles 
Timothy D. Adams *Michael Andersson David D. Aufhauser Barbara Barrett 
Colleen Bell 
Stephen Biegun 
Linden P. Blue 
Adam Boehler 
John Bonsell 
Philip M. Breedlove Myron Brilliant 
*Esther Brimmer 
Richard R. Burt 
*Teresa Carlson 
*James E. Cartwright John E. Chapoton 
Ahmed Charai 
Melanie Chen 
Michael Chertoff 
*George Chopivsky Wesley K. Clark 
*Helima Croft 
*Ankit N. Desai 
Dario Deste 
*Paula J. Dobriansky Joseph F. Dunford, Jr. Richard Edelman 
Thomas J. Egan, Jr. Stuart E. Eizenstat Mark T. Esper 
*Michael Fisch 
*Alan H. Fleischmann Jendayi E. Frazer 
Meg Gentle 
Thomas H. Glocer John B. Goodman *Sherri W. Goodman Jarosław Grzesiak Murathan Günal 
Frank Haun 
Michael V. Hayden Tim Holt 
*Karl V. Hopkins 
Kay Bailey Hutchison Ian Ihnatowycz 
Mark Isakowitz 
Wolfgang F. Ischinger Deborah Lee James *Joia M. Johnson 
*Safi Kalo 
Andre Kelleners 
Brian L. Kelly 
Henry A. Kissinger John E. Klein 
*C. Jeffrey Knittel Joseph Konzelmann Franklin D. Kramer Laura Lane 
Almar Latour 
Yann Le Pallec 
Jan M. Lodal 
Douglas Lute 
Jane Holl Lute 
William J. Lynn 
Mark Machin 
Umer Mansha 
Marco Margheri 
Michael Margolis Chris Marlin 
William Marron 
Christian Marrone Gerardo Mato 
Timothy McBride Erin McGrain 
John M. McHugh 
*Judith A. Miller 
Dariusz Mioduski Michael J. Morell *Richard Morningstar Georgette Mosbacher Majida Mourad 
Dambisa F. Moyo Virginia A. Mulberger Mary Claire Murphy Edward J. Newberry Franco Nuschese Joseph S. Nye 
Ahmet M.Ören 
Sally A. Painter 
Ana I. Palacio 
*Kostas Pantazopoulos Alan Pellegrini 
David H. Petraeus *Lisa Pollina 
Daniel B. Poneman *Dina H. Powell  
dddMcCormick 
Michael Punke 
Ashraf Qazi 
Thomas J. Ridge 
Gary Rieschel 
Lawrence Di Rita 
Michael J. Rogers  Charles O. Rossotti Harry Sachinis 
C. Michael Scaparrotti Ivan A. Schlager 
Rajiv Shah 
Gregg Sherrill 
Jeff Shockey 
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui Kris Singh 
Walter Slocombe 
Christopher Smith Clifford M. Sobel 
James G. Stavridis Michael S. Steele 
Richard J.A. Steele Mary Streett 
*Gil Tenzer 
*Frances M. Townsend Clyde C. Tuggle 
Melanne Verveer 
Charles F. Wald 
Michael F. Walsh 
Ronald Weiser 
*Al Williams 
Maciej Witucki 
Neal S. Wolin 
*Jenny Wood 
Guang Yang 
Mary C. Yates 
Dov S. Zakheim 
HONORARY  
DIRECTORS 
James A. Baker, III Ashton B. Carter Robert M. Gates James N. Mattis Michael G. Mullen Leon E. Panetta William J. Perry Condoleezza Rice Horst Teltschik William H. Webster
*Executive Committee Members List as of September12, 2022 
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes  constructive US leadership and engagement in international  affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in  meeting today’s global challenges. 
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights  reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or  transmitted in any form or by any means without permission  in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief  quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please  direct inquiries to: 
Atlantic Council 
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor, 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org 
Made possible by: