Vital Signs
The surgeon, anesthesiologist, physician’s assistant, or nurse 
practitioner will write an order that specifies how often the vital signs 
should be checked. Measuring the pulse and blood pressure every 15 
minutes in the first hour after the operation is not unusual. The CNA 
should always let the supervising nurse or physician know about a 
fever or an abnormal pulse or blood pressure. This is especially 
important when caring for a post-operative patient. Slight deviations of 
pulse and blood pressure may be normal after surgery, but these 
should still be reported. It should not be assumed that a pulse greater 
than 100, or a systolic blood pressure that is low, are of no concern.
Mental Status
Drowsiness is expected after surgery. This can be minimal or it may be 
significant. However, excessive drowsiness or drowsiness that is not 
improving is not normal. A nurse or physician should be informed if a 
patient’s mental status appears abnormal.
Pain
Pain is inevitable following surgery. An incision has been made through 
the skin, and the swelling and bleeding at the incision increase 
pressure on nerve endings, contributing to the pain. Some patients will 
inform the CNA or nurse about their pain and request medications, but 
others will not. 
The CNA should always ask the post-operative patient if pain is 
occurring, but should also be observant to recognize the nonverbal 
signs of pain. A patient may decide to endure the pain without taking 
pain medication because of feeling wary about accepting medication. 
Aside from specifically asking the patient about pain, the CNA should 
look for objective information and nonverbal cues that indicate the 
presence of pain. Does the patient grimace when asked to move? Is 
the patient hesitant about performing coughing and deep breathing 
exercises? Is the patient’s blood pressure and heart rate elevated? If 
the patient is showing evidence of any of the above, the CNA may 
reasonably assume that a significant level of pain is occurring. Pain 
control is important as it increases patient compliance with post-operative movement and surgical wound healing measures, and the 
speed of recovery. It is also important to address physical suffering in 
the post-operative phase to improve standard quality measures of 
patient comfort during hospital care.
The level of pain a patient has will depend in part on what operation 
was performed. The pain associated with a minor procedure should be 
mild, but if the patient has had a major orthopedic surgery, such as 
hip surgery, the pain can be severe. There is no “normal” level of pain 
and each person has an individual level of tolerance. If the procedure 
was a simple one, and the patient is significantly uncomfortable, this
may indicate a problem. If the CNA notices the patient is 
uncomfortable, a nurse or physician should always be informed. If the 
patient is requesting pain medication more frequently than it has been 
prescribed, this is a warning sign.
 
Many healthcare facilities use pain scales to assess a patient’s level of 
pain. A typical pain scale is the 1-10 scale. The patient is asked to 
remember the worst pain ever experienced and consider that a level 
10. The patient is then asked to remember a painful experience that 
was very minor and consider that a level 1. After that, the patient is 
asked to assign the current level of pain a number on the 1-10 pain 
scale. The CNA would ask the patient, for example, “If the worst pain 
you have ever felt was a 10 and a very minor pain you’ve experienced 
was a 1, what would you consider your current level of pain to be?”
Surgical Dressing
A surgical dressing is a sterile cover applied over the incision. A 
dressing can be a small bandage, or it may be a large, complicated 
affair with gauze pads and tape. The surgeon will write orders that 
specify how to care for the dressing. It is very important to follow 
these orders exactly. The CNA should not change or adjust the 
dressing in any way that has not been ordered. The dressing should be 
checked frequently to make sure it is intact and that there are no loose 
edges. Any bleeding or unusual drainage should be noted, and if the 
CNA notices either one, a supervising nurse or physician needs to be 
notified.