Plant by-products: Alfalfa Meal or Pellets Alfalfa meal or pellets are often used as animal feed. Primarily they are used to increase organic matter in the soil but do provide nutrients and a high availability of trace minerals. They contain trianconatol, a natural fatty acid growth stimulant. Corn Gluten meal Corn Gluten products have a high percentage of nitrogen. It carries a warning to allow 1 to 4 months of decomposition in the soil prior to seeding. Allelopathic properties will inhibit the germination of seeds. However, there is no danger to established or transplanted plants. This product is also marketed as a pre-emergent weed control for annual grasses in bluegrass lawns. Cottonseed meal In warm soils this fertilizer is readily available with little danger of over-fertilizing. Use for acid-loving plants such as rhododendrons, blueberries and azaleas. Seaweed extract Seaweed is a good source of trace metals, micronutrients, amino acids and vitamins plus growth hormones that stimulate plant cell division. It doesn't smell as much as a fish emulsion but is more expensive.  Kelp Meal – a product of the ocean is primarily used as a trace mineral source. It is often combined with fish meal to add N-P-K value  Kelp Powder – similar to kelp meal but ground fine enough to put into solution and applied as a foliar spray or injected into an irrigation system.  Liquid Kelp – usually cold processed, liquid kelp will have higher levels of growth hormones than extracts. Some may be enzymatically digested, making growth hormones even more available to the plants.

Animal by-products: Manures Nutrient concentrations in manures vary widely with the kind of animal they're from. Fresh manure has the highest concentration and can burn tender roots easily. Composted manure is less harsh. Although the concentration of nutrients is lower in manure than in man-made fertilizers, manure improves soil structure and increases its water holding capacity. Blood meal This dried blood from cattle slaughterhouses is a rich source of nitrogen. Do not apply at more than recommended rates because it is concentrated enough to harm plants. Always wear a mask to protect your lungs from dust. Bone Meal Bone meal decomposes slowly and releases phosphorus gradually. Bone meal is good for bulbs that don't sprout for several months after they're planted and for alkaline-loving plants such as clematis, lilac and hydrangea. NOTE: Rarely need phosphorus in the Spokane area. Feather Meal Sourced from poultry slaughter feather meal has high nitrogen (N) levels but is very slow to release the N. Fish emulsion This well-rounded fertilizer consists of partly decomposed ground fish. The smell is strong but will dissipate in a day or two, and can deter pests that don't like the fish smell. It has a high concentration of nitrogen and can burn plants if over-used (especially container plants). Enzymatically digested hydrolyzed liquid fish Enzymatically digested hydrolyzed fish use enzymes to digest the fish wastes instead of using heat and acids (fish emulsion). This retains more of the proteins, enzymes, vitamins and micronutrients than emulsions. Fish meal Fish meal is ground and heat dried fish waste.