Nevertheless, there is still no AI that is
equivalent or superior to human intelligence in all of its aspects2
.
In the near future however, this vision might become reality. Technological progress will play
a key role as an enabler of modern AI systems: Computing power and memory size are estimated to
multiply by a thousand times over the next twenty to twenty-five years, facilitating the processing
and storing of massive amounts of data3
. Further developments in the field of artificial neural
networks and deep learning techniques will result in systems that are less dependent on human
involvement; improved sensor technology will make it easier for systems to interact with their
environment4
. The decreasing costs for AI technologies will further facilitate their pervasiveness.
Although a big portion of AI research is working towards systems that have little to do with
creating a machine with human features, there are still advances in this field – for example, robot
woman Sophia who became a YouTube celebrity for stating in a 2016 interview that she wanted “to
destroy humans”5
. While this seemed to be rather a marketing stunt, it is important to discuss the
effects of humanoid and android robots.
In this essay, I want to take a closer look at the status quo of humanoid AI and the
implications this technology can have as an assistant, friend or even love interest to humans. I argue
that artificial intelligence will – once it becomes a realistic companion to humans – interrupt
societal structures to some extent, leading to a growing amount of human-machine relationships.

.
To pursue “real” AI, specialists in developmental robotics are now following a less abstract
path than writing a programme for a computer11. Their theory is that a system that has an actual
body will be more likely to build a form of general intelligence because it can experience its
surroundings and match sensorial data with actions12. This branch of robotics is based on another
hypothesis of Turing’s; in 1950, he claimed that an artificially intelligent system could be best
created if it went through a phase that is similar to the childhood of other species 13
.
The iCub robot was developed to investigate this theory. Having the weight and size of an
infant, it carries the spirit of Turing’s thought: Instead of pre-programming its skills and feeding it
with data, researchers teach it like a child to enable it to conceive its own solutions 14. Here, one
question arises: How does a system develop the will to learn something? After all, it does not even
have a will by default. It was found that a strategy working for humans does the same trick for AI
systems too: a reward. The field of reinforcement learning derives from this method and has been
also applied to the iCub series15. This has enabled the robots to attain skills like picking up an item16
or crawling on the floor17. These actions might not seem too complex for us at the first glance but
they do involve a number of obstacles the robot has to overcome. In the future, iCub could help us
in the household by setting the table for dinner or preparing food.
But there is another interesting thing about iCub: its chubby face, big eyes, and LED-facial
expressions leave no doubt that it was made to bear a resemblance to real humans. Yet still, it is
obvious to anybody that it is not an actual person. These features make iCub a so-called humanoid.
Robots that are made to look exactly like humans on the other hand are called androids
The market is prepared for it: Looking at the increasing popularity of home assistants like
Alexa or Google Assistant we can expect our reliance on technological devices to grow even
stronger in the future. They might become more to us than just a personal weatherman or a direct
connection to our Amazon shopping basket: artificially intelligent programmes and robots could
eventually write Christmas cards to our friends and family, suggest the perfect birthday present for
our partner or even take care of our children.
In fact, a robot nanny is not as far-fetched as one would expect: Robots like Pepper, iPal or
Kuri are programmed to be companions to children – they can recognize emotions in their faces,
play with them and let parents watch their offspring from afar through their built-in cameras 23. They
might not yet be an adequate substitute for an adult taking care, but manufacturers are definitely
working towards this goal. Regarding the high costs of childcare in many countries, they could soon
become a very popular help in parenting – and real friends to a generation that grows up surrounded
by technology. In Japanese schools, robots have already proven to be a successful addition. They
are assisting students to focus better in class, add a welcome variety to subjects like history or show
exercises in physical education24. The robot Robosem has been teaching English in South Korean
classrooms, as teachers in this subject are scarce25
.
Not only childcare can profit from the advances in AI and robotics: As a means of therapy,
intelligent technology can be valuable in retirement homes. An example of this is the robot seal
Paro that has been successfully utilized in dementia therapy and as a companion to elderly people
since its introduction in 2001. The robot’s body is covered in fake fur and it is sensitive to touch,
moving and making seal-like noises when it is petted. It is used to calm patients, to encourage social
interactions and to give people that are reliant on help a chance to switch roles and become
caregivers themselves26. Once they become more elaborate, robots could be a way to meet the
shortage of skilled workers in the field of elderly care especially in aging societies like Japan or
Germany.
Ethical Implications of Human-Robot Relationships
In the light of the technological advances that will be made within the next years, the ethics of
human-robot relationships must be discussed. The next generations will likely grow up surrounded
by artificially intelligent machines and it is hard to say if and how this will affect their perceptions
of interaction not only with robots but humans as well.
A study conducted by ATR Intelligent Robotics and Communications and three Japanese
universities revealed that children sometimes showed abusive behaviour towards robots – especially
when they were in groups without any adults close by. In the study, the robot Robovie was
patrolling a Japanese mall, asking people politely to step aside when somebody stood in its way; if
there was no reaction, the robot would move in the opposite direction. There were several situations
however, where researchers observed that children were deliberately blocking the robot’s way,
kicking it, throwing items at it and calling it names. As a consequence, the researchers developed an algorithm that let the robot recognize groups of children and avoid them33. This does not seem like a
perfect solution to the problem, especially if we take the rising amount of robots in children’s rooms
into account. 
It is hard to say to what extent robots will become a surrogate for genuine human affection in
the future but revisiting the comparison to smartphones made earlier, I believe that it is alarming
that people turn to machines in the search for human connection. In a society that is increasingly
built on perfectionist standards, I argue that artificially intelligent robots designed to be friends and
lovers might become a threat for human relationships. If we hold our friends and partners to the
same standards that we will be used from robots in the future, we will be heavily disappointed.
