U.S. Economic, Housing and Mortgage Market Outlook 
Recent developments 
U.S. economy: U.S. economic growth moderated to start the year. According to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) “advance” estimate of Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the seasonally adjusted annual rate (SAAR) of growth in GDP in Q1 2024 was 1.6%, slowing from a 3.4% rate in Q4 2023. The deceleration in GDP growth was led by slower growth in consumption expenditures, net exports, and government consumption expenditures. Consumer spending was weaker due to a decline in spending on durable goods, primarily autos, and flatlining nondurable goods, primarily due to less spending on gasoline. Spending on services accelerated in the first quarter, led by higher spending on health care, financial services and insurance. Trade weighed on GDP growth with more modest exports and an increase in imports. Compared to most advanced economies, the U.S. economy continues to perform relatively well. The positive tailwinds to overall growth from government spending are waning. The contribution to GDP growth from government consumption expenditures and gross investment remains positive but was less than a third of what it was in Q4 2023. The latest report paints a picture of an economy that continues to perform well, but that is moderating as it settles into a growth pattern more consistent with long-run trends. Consistent with economic growth trends, the labor market moderated in April 2024 with nonfarm payroll employment increasing by 175,000, down from an increase of 315,000 in March, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The unemployment rate inched up from 3.8% in March to 3.9% in April. However, the unemployment rate has remained below 4% for the twenty-seventh consecutive month. Average hourly earnings for all employees on private nonfarm payrolls rose 0.2% month-over-month, and compared to a year ago, average hourly earnings increased 3.9%. Overall, the jobs report indicates a resilient but cooling labor market. The core Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) price index, the Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation gauge that strips out volatile food and energy prices, rose 0.3% month-over-month in March.1 While this increase in the core PCE was in line with expectations, the progress on inflation has slowed and has implications for future Federal Reserve monetary policy. The index increased 2.8% from a year ago and remains above the Federal Reserve target of 2.0%. The Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased by 0.4% in April, exceeding consensus expectations and triggering a negative market reaction. In another sign of persistent inflationary pressures, the employment cost index came in above expectations with a 1.2% quarter-over-quarter increase in Q1 2024 and a 4.2% increase in compensation costs over the year. The persistence of inflation has led market participants to conclude that the likelihood of multiple Federal Reserve rate cuts in 2024 is diminished and the next rate cut is also likely further away. In summary, U.S. economic growth moderated at the beginning of 2024, reflecting the impact of higher interest rates and declining consumer savings. The labor market also showed signs of cooling with softer-than expected job growth in April. U.S. housing and mortgage market: After benefitting from stable mortgage rates in the first couple of months of the year, the housing market witnessed a slowdown in March due to the rebound in rates. Total (existing + new) home sales for March fell by 2.7% from February and were down 2.1% from a year ago. This decline was led by existing home sales, which continued to reel under the impact of rising rates. Existing home sales were at an annual rate of 4.19 million in March, 4.3% below February sales and 3.7% lower than March 2023.2 However, new home sales for March grew 8.8% from February to an annualized rate of 693,000, accounting for about 14% of total home sales.3 As the supply of existing homes for sale remains low and home prices continue to rise, more buyers are choosing to purchase new homes than in previous years. According to the National Association of Homebuilders’ Housing Market Index, homebuilder confidence remained steady in March with the index coming in at 51. This is above the threshold of 50, indicating positive building conditions.4 However, the housing construction sector experienced some moderation. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, new residential construction fell in March with total starts decreasing 14.7%, the largest monthly decline since May 2022. The decline was led by multifamily starts which fell around 21% month-overmonth and single-family housing starts fell 12% month-over-month in March. The FHFA Purchase-Only Home Price Index for February increased by 1.2% month-over-month compared to a decrease of 0.1% in January. Year-over-year house price growth remained strong at 7.0% for February. The depleted inventory of homes available for sale, along with still high demand, continued to put upward pressure on house prices. Mortgage rates ticked up in April averaging 6.99% for the month, as measured by Freddie Mac’s Primary Mortgage Market Survey®, and ended the month at 7.17%. According to the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) Weekly Application Survey, mortgage activity declined over the month as rates exceeded 7% for the first time this year. Overall mortgage activity was down 1.8% month-over-month and 10.4% year-over-year at the end of April. Refinance activity for April was down 3.3% compared to March, and purchase applications were down 2.7% month-over-month.Tight inventory coupled with higher rates resulted in a stagnant start to the year in terms of homeownership. The homeownership rate in Q1 2024 ticked down to 65.6% from 65.7% in Q4 2023 and 66% in Q1 2023.5 The historical average homeownership rate over the period from Q1 1964 to Q1 2024 is 65.2%. Total housing stock was at 146.4 million units as of Q1 2024, an increase of around 1.6 million units compared to the same time last year. This reflected an increase of approximately 1.4 million in total occupied housing units and 0.2 million vacant units. A large share of the increase in occupied units came from renters compared to homeowners. Renter-occupied units increased approximately 1 million over the last year while owner-occupied units were up around 0.6 million. The homeowner vacancy rate in Q1 2024 was down to 0.8% from 0.9% in Q4 2023. The rental vacancy rate was unchanged over the quarter at 6.6%. Vacancy rates remain on balance very low. To bring the vacancy rate, both rental and homeowner, back in line with historical averages, the U.S. would need to add an additional 1.5 million vacant for-sale and for-rent homes (Exhibit 1).6 Without such units, the pressure on housing markets will persist. Additionally, the vacant housing undersupply metric is almost certainly a dramatic underestimate of the total housing shortage for the U.S. This is because this metric does not account for latent housing demand and vacant housing that is not for sale or for rent. Overall, tight inventory and “higher for longer” rates are still key barriers to home sale volumes. Mortgage rates above 7% continue to price out many prospective homebuyers and sellers have less incentive to sell.

Outlook 
While the U.S. economy has shown resilience so far, we expect higher interest rates to weigh on future growth, with the economy settling into a lower rate of growth in 2024 and 2025. However, we do not expect a recession in our baseline scenario. In our baseline, slower growth and a weaker labor market help to rein in inflation while the economy throttles back but avoids stalling. Our baseline scenario has one Federal Reserve rate cut towards the end of the year. As a result, we expect mortgage rates to remain elevated through most of 2024. These high interest rates will prompt prospective buyers to readjust their housing expectations, but we anticipate housing demand to remain high due to favorable demographics, particularly in the starter home segment. Despite the strong housing demand, our housing market outlook is tempered by lack of inventory for sale. Under our baseline scenario, we anticipate improvement in home sales compared to 2023, albeit by a slim margin, as the rate lock-in effect will delay existing homes from entering the market. Our outlook on the mortgage origination market is also clouded by the expectation of low sale volumes. With our projection of mortgage interest rates remaining higher for longer, we anticipate modest growth in mortgage origination volumes, supported by high home prices. However, the combination of higher interest rates and limited inventory could limit purchase originations. Additionally, we expect refinance origination volumes to decline as homeowners have already secured low rates, posing potential challenge in the refinance market. While our outlook is positive, there are emerging risks, particularly from inflation. Over the last year, almost half of the overall gains in inflation came from housing inflation, and in an environment where home prices are growing, inflationary pressures might persist for longer. Under a high inflation scenario, interest rates will remain high, negatively impacting consumer spending behavior and credit performance, which can further slowdown economic growth.