1.10 Increasing the effectiveness of the Office of Tax Simplification (OTS) –
The government is publishing its first five-year review of the OTS, launched in 
March 2021, to examine the effectiveness of the OTS. It makes eight 
recommendations.
1.11 Response to Office of Tax Simplification Review of Capital Gains Tax 
(CGT) – The government is publishing its response to the OTS’s two-part 
review of CGT. The government has carefully considered the OTS’s 
recommendations and will keep the CGT system under review to ensure it is 
simple and efficient. The government has accepted five of the technical 
recommendations in the OTS’s second report and will work towards their 
implementation. 
1.12 Response to Office of Tax Simplification Review of Inheritance Tax 
(IHT) – The government is publishing its response to the OTS’s review of the 
design of IHT. It has decided not to proceed with any changes at this point in 
time. The government responded to the OTS’s review of the administration 
of IHT in March 2021. 
6
Chapter 2
Tackling non-compliance
2.1 Since 2010 the government has introduced over 150 new measures 
and invested over £2 billion in HMRC to tackle non-compliance in the tax 
system – this has secured and protected over £250 billion which would 
otherwise have gone unpaid. Significant reforms include: the introduction of 
the General Anti-Abuse Rule; Accelerated Payments; the implementation of 
the OECD Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Action Plan; and a range of 
measures to clamp down on promoters of tax avoidance. The measures 
announced in this document build on that strong base and further the 
government’s aim for everyone to pay the tax that is legally due, no matter 
who they are.
2.2 Modernising tax debt collection for non-paying businesses – The 
government is publishing a call for evidence on how HMRC can modernise its 
collection of tax debts to reflect the changing nature of the economy, where 
an increased use of e-commerce has given rise to new business practices –
including the conduct of business in the UK without having a presence or 
physical assets here. The call for evidence also seeks views on HMRC’s 
approach to the small minority of business taxpayers who do not engage 
with HMRC and hold off paying their tax for as long as they can, forcing 
HMRC to resort to costly and time-consuming enforcement action. The 
proposals will not affect taxpayers who are in temporary financial difficulty 
and need support from HMRC to get back onto a sustainable financial 
footing – including those affected by the Covid-19 pandemic.
2.3 OECD’s Model Mandatory Disclosure Rules to tackle non-compliance –
At Spring Budget 2021, the government announced that it would implement 
the OECD’s Model Mandatory Disclosure Rules. The government is now 
issuing a technical consultation and draft regulations. Mandatory Disclosure 
Rules require advisers (and sometimes taxpayers) to report information to the 
tax authorities on certain prescribed arrangements and structures, including 
those that could circumvent existing tax transparency reporting rules known 
as the Common Reporting Standard. This information will be exchanged with 
relevant tax authorities to help deter non-compliance, assist in identifying 
and challenging evasion, and support the development of tax policy.
2.4 Improving Transfer Pricing Documentation – The government is 
publishing a summary of responses to the consultation that closed in June 
2021. It will legislate in 2022 to require businesses that are in scope of 
country-by-country reporting to maintain a master file and local file in line 
with OECD Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Action 13, and a supporting 
7
summary audit trail. These changes will take effect from April 2023. The 
government will continue to review the case for companies to submit an 
International Dealings Schedule.
2.5 Extending tax conditionality to licences in Scotland and Northern 
Ireland – The government is publishing a summary of responses to the 
consultation on extending tax conditionality to certain licences in Scotland 
and Northern Ireland from April 2023. This makes the renewal of certain 
licences conditional on applicants completing checks that confirm they are 
appropriately registered for tax. The policy will be developed through 
continued engagement with the Devolved Administrations and is consistent 
with reforms which come into force in England and Wales in April 2022. 
Licensing bodies will have to obtain confirmation that an applicant has 
completed the check before deciding on their renewal application, making it 
more difficult for traders to operate in the hidden economy. The government 
remains committed to exploring further the wider application of tax 
conditionality.
2.6 Strengthening and modernising Individual Savings Accounts (ISA) 
compliance and penalties – In December 2020, the Economic Secretary to the 
Treasury announced that: “The Treasury is urgently looking at the sufficiency 
of checks on IF [Innovative Finance] ISA managers and the penalties regime.”
Following that announcement, the government is now publishing a call for 
evidence on proposals to enhance ISA compliance, which will help determine 
how the current approach can be strengthened and modernised to 
encourage ISA managers and investors to get things right first time. The 
proposals apply to all types of ISA – Cash, Stocks and Shares, Junior, Lifetime 
and Innovative Finance.
2.7 Consulting on making Stamp Duty Land Tax (SDLT) reliefs fairer – The 
government is publishing a consultation on the SDLT reliefs for purchases of 
mixed property and multiple dwellings. These reliefs are being exploited by
some purchasers to unfairly reduce their tax liability. This consultation sets 
out potential changes to make the system fairer and reduce the scope for 
misuse and incorrect claims.
2.8 New stakeholder forum on tackling offshore tax non-compliance – The 
government has established an HMRC stakeholder forum with representative 
bodies and agents to explore ideas to tackle offshore tax non-compliance. 
This follows from the publication of two discussion documents in spring 
2021, as part of implementing HMRC’s ‘No Safe Havens’ strategy. The 
documents sought views on how to help taxpayers reduce offshore noncompliance in relation to non-UK income, gains and assets, and how to 
reduce and prevent international tax debt. 
2.9 Exploring the potential of VAT split payment – The government is 
committed to exploring further VAT split payment, an alternative method of 
VAT collection where the tax element of a digital payment could be remitted 
directly to HMRC. While the work is at an exploratory stage, the government 
will continue to assess the potential of split payment both for tackling 
overseas VAT non-compliance and wider tax modernisation. The government 
8
is grateful for the ongoing input of stakeholders in the payments industry 
and will continue to take this work forward collaboratively, including through 
the Industry Working Group established in 2018.
2.10 Use of marketed tax avoidance schemes in the UK – HMRC is 
publishing its annual report on the use of marketed tax avoidance schemes in 
the UK. It sets out the numbers and characteristics of taxpayers using 
avoidance schemes in the tax year 2019-2020. The report includes data on 
occupations, locations, ages and the average declared incomes of those 
involved in avoidance. 
9
Chapter 3
Further tax policy announcements
3.1 It is important that the tax system continues to be fit for the modern 
world, and that government continues to take action to level the playing field 
and increase transparency. The policies set out in this section open new 
consultations on promising areas for potential reform and set out next steps 
on reform work already underway.
Taxes fit for the modern world
3.2 Ensuring Landfill Tax continues to support environmental objectives – 
In spring 2021, the government announced it would review aspects of 
Landfill Tax in England and Northern Ireland. It is now launching a call for 
evidence, focused on how Landfill Tax can continue to support the 
government's ambitious environmental objectives, including achieving zero 
avoidable waste by 2050.