Circuit Split over the Food and Drug
Administration’s Denial of Applications
Seeking to Market Flavored E-Cigarettes, Part
1 of 2
April 5, 2024
Electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS) products—products that go by many common names, such as
e-cigarettes and vape pens—are generally required to receive prior authorization from the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) before they can be lawfully marketed in the United States. Before FDA issued
regulations in 2016 to subject these products to the premarket review process, however, many of them
were already being sold on the U.S. market and were allowed to remain there while FDA implemented the
application and review process. These products come in a variety of forms and flavors, from tobacco and
menthol flavors based on the flavors of traditional combustible cigarettes to other flavors based on the
flavors of fruit, candy, and other sweets (“flavored ENDS products”). While limited studies of certain
ENDS products show that they contain substantially lower levels of toxins than combustible cigarettes,
indicating a benefit to current adult smokers who switch completely to using ENDS products, flavored
ENDS products have been shown to be particularly attractive to youth. In a 2016-2017 study, for instance,
93.2% of youth ENDS product users reported that their first use was with a flavored product. In 2018, the
Surgeon General issued an advisory on the “e-cigarette epidemic among youth.”
Since the initial deadline in September 2020 for ENDS product manufacturers to submit their premarket
tobacco product applications (PMTAs), FDA has received millions of applications for ENDS products. To
date, the agency has authorized 23 tobacco-flavored ENDS products for lawful marketing and has not
authorized any flavored ENDS products. Many applicants that have received a marketing denial order
(MDO) for their flavored ENDS products have filed petitions in U.S. Courts of Appeals throughout the
country to challenge the denial of their PMTAs. Of the courts that have considered these petitions, the
Second, Third, Fourth, Sixth, Seventh, Ninth, Tenth, and D.C. Circuits have sided with FDA and denied
the petitions or requests to stay the agency’s MDOs. The Eleventh and Fifth Circuits, on the other hand,
have sided with the ENDS manufacturers and vacated FDA’s MDOs, remanding the applications to FDA
for reconsideration. This circuit split sets the stage for potential Supreme Court review regarding what
information FDA may require applicants seeking to market flavored ENDS products to provide as part of
Congressional Research Service
https://crsreports.congress.gov
LSB11141
Congressional Research Service 2
their PMTAs. This two-part Sidebar examines the circuit split. Part I provides an overview of the Family
Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (TCA) regulatory framework, relevant FDA actions related
to ENDS products, and the agency’s review and denial of the PMTAs involving flavored ENDS products.
Part II provides an overview of the litigation challenging those FDA orders, the court decisions to date,
and certain preliminary observations for consideration by Congress.
Background on TCA’s Statutory Framework
In 2009, Congress enacted the TCA, which established the central federal regulatory regime for the
manufacture, marketing, and distribution of tobacco products. Among other things, the TCA required all
new tobacco products—that is, those not commercially marketed in the United States prior to February
15, 2007—to receive prior authorization from FDA before they can be marketed to the public. In
establishing this regulatory regime, the TCA aims to balance competing interests in protecting the public’s
health against the harmful effects of smoking and youth tobacco use, while preserving access to lawfully
marketed tobacco products for adult consumers. To further this goal, the TCA grants FDA “primary
Federal regulatory authority” over tobacco products and establishes a premarket review process for new
tobacco products. Such products generally may not be marketed until the manufacturer submits a PMTA
and receives a marketing granted order (MGO) from the Center for Tobacco Products, established within
FDA to implement the TCA.
The TCA permits FDA to issue an MGO only upon certain findings, including a conclusion that
“permitting such tobacco product to be marketed would be appropriate for the protection of the public
health,” or APPH. This APPH determination must be made “with respect to the risks and benefits to the
population as a whole, including users and nonusers of the tobacco product,” taking into account the
likelihood that existing users of tobacco products will stop using such products and the likelihood that
those who do not use such products will start using them. The TCA directs FDA, in making this
evaluation, to consult a range of evidence, including “information submitted to the Secretary as part of the
[PMTA] and any other information before the Secretary with respect to such tobacco product.” Such
information may include “when appropriate . . . well-controlled investigations, which may include 1 or
more clinical investigations by experts qualified by training and experience to evaluate the tobacco
product,” as well as other “valid scientific evidence” determined by the Secretary to be sufficient to
evaluate the tobacco product.
While the TCA explicitly applies to cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, and smokeless
tobacco, the statute also authorizes FDA to deem other tobacco products subject to the law. In 2016, FDA
invoked this authority and promulgated what is known as the Deeming Rule, which subjected ENDS
products to the TCA’s regulatory regime.
