In theory, countries exchange assets with different risk profiles to smooth consumption fluctuations
across future random states of nature. This intratemporal trade, an exchange of consumption across
different states of nature that occur on the same date, may be contrasted with intertemporal trade, in
which consumption on one date is traded for an asset entitling the buyer to consumption on a future
date. Cross-border purchases of assets with other assets are intratemporal trades, purchases of goods or
services with assets are intertemporal trades.
A country’s intertemporal budget constraint limits the present value of its (state-contingent)
expenditure (on consumption and investment) to the present value of its (state-contingent) output
plus the market value of its net financial claims on the outside world (the net international investment
position, or NIIP). Thus, a country’s ultimate consumption possibilities depend not only on the NIIP, but
on the prices a country faces in world markets and its (stochastic) output and investment levels.
Ideally, if a country has maximally hedged its idiosyncratic risk in world asset markets, its NIIP will
respond to shocks (including shocks to current and future world prices) in ways that cushion domestic
consumption possibilities. Furthermore, if markets are complete in the sense of Arrow and Debreu, asset
trades between individuals will indeed represent Pareto improvements in resource allocation, so that it
makes sense to speak of countries as if they consisted of representative individuals. But this type of world
– a world without crises – is not the world we inhabit. In the real world, financial trades that one agent
makes, viewing them as personally advantageous, canwork to the detriment of others. The implication is
that the sheer volume of financial trade can be positively correlated with financial instability risks.
It is in the realm of intratemporal asset trade that international trading volume has expanded most in
recent years. Fig. 1 illustrates the process. The upper horizontal arrows represent (intratemporal) trade of
presently available goods for other present goods between a home and a foreign country, with arrow
lengths proportional to the value of the items exchanged. In the figure, Home ships a higher value of goods
to Foreign than Foreign ships to Home, so the net difference (Home’s current account surplus)must be paid
for by assets that Foreign pays to Home in settlement of the Foreign current account deficit. The implied
intertemporal trade – of present consumption for claims on future consumption– is shown in the figure by
the diagonal arrows, with lengths equal to the current account imbalance between Home and Foreign.
The lower horizontal arrows in Fig. 1 represent intratemporal trade of assets for other assets by the
two countries. Home buys more assets from Foreign than it sells – financing the difference through its
current export surplus – but while the difference in the two arrows’ lengths is fixed by the size of the
current account imbalance, the arrow lengths themselves can be arbitrarily big. At any point in time,
the size of the current account imbalance is limited by output sizes and the sizes of predetermined
international assets and liabilities – but there is no limit to the number of times funds can be recycled in
different forms between Home and Foreign. In that process, the gross external assets and liabilities of
the two countries can expand explosively.