Current debates in microfinance 
1 
1.1 Subsidised credit provision 
From the 1950s, governments and international aid donors subsidised credit delivery to small farmers in rural areas of many developing countries. It was assumed that poor people found great difficulty in obtaining adequate volumes of credit and were charged high rates of interest by monopolistic money-lenders. Development finance institutions, such as Agricultural Development Banks, were responsible for the delivery of cheap credit to poor farmers. 
These institutions attempted to supervise the uses to which loans were put, and repayment schedules were based on the expected income flow from the investment. Returns were often overestimated. For example, calculations would be based on agricultural yields for good years (Adams and Von Pischke, 1992). As a result, loans were often not repaid. The credibility and financial viability of these subsidised credit schemes were further weakened by the use of public money to waive outstanding and overdue loans at election time (Adams and Von Pischke, 1992; Lipton, 1996; Wiggins and Rogaly, 1989). A dependence on the fluctuating whims of governments and donors, together with poor investment decisions and low repayment rates made many of these development finance institutions unable to sustain their lend- ing programmes. Credit provision for poor people was transitory and limited. 
1.2 The move to market-based solutions 
This model of subsidised credit was subjected to steady criticism from the mid-1970s as donors and other resource allocators switched attention from state intervention to market-based solutions. Policy-makers were reminded 
5 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
that credit could also be described as debt and that the over-supply of subsidised credit without realistic assessment of people's ability to repay could result in impoverishment for borrowers. 
At the same time the concept of 'transaction costs', and the notion that full information about borrowers was not available to lenders, were used by the opponents of subsidised credit to justify the high interest-rates charged by money-lenders. Lending money carries with it the risk of non-repayment. In order to know who is creditworthy and who is not, and so reduce this risk, the lender screens potential borrowers. This involves gathering information on the circumstances of individuals, which may not be easy to obtain. Then enforcement costs are incurred to ensure repayment. Through this process risks are reduced, though not eliminated. Where a loan is disbursed on condition that it is used for a particular purpose, supervision costs also arise. 
Using these tools of analysis it was argued that private money-lenders charged interest rates which were higher than formal bank-rates because of the high costs they faced in terms of risk, particularly when lending without physical collateral. At the same time, it was argued that money-lenders were an efficient source of credit because their greater knowledge of the people to whom they were lending lowered screening costs. 
Moreover, potential borrowers faced high transaction costs when they sought loans from formal-sector finance institutions. These costs included the time, travel, and paperwork involved in obtaining credit, and were often pro- hibitive for poor clients, especially those most geographically isolated. On the basis of this analysis, a group of economists based at Ohio State University (USA), notably Dale Adams and J D Von Pischke, put forward the view that the provision of credit should be left almost entirely to the private sector. 
In concentrating on the problems of publicly subsidised credit, these economists ignored the social ties, power relations, and coercion associated with the activities of money-lenders. However, detailed micro-level research has demonstrated the widespread use of interlocked' contracts to force exchange to the disadvantage of poor people (Bhaduri, 1981). Powerful local people, including landlords, employers, and traders, are able to influence the terms of loans made to tenants, workers, and small producers via conditions set in transactions involving land, labour, or crops. For example, traders frequently lend working capital to small farmers on condition that their crops are sold to that trader at a pre-determined price. Similarly, loans are made to workers against the promise of labour to be provided at below the going rate at a set future date (Rogaly, 1996b). 
Against the background of these debates, recent developments in the design of microfinance schemes have generated an understandably high degree of excitement. This is because innovative features in design have 
6 
Current debates in microfinance 
reduced the costs and risks of making loans to poor and isolated people, and made financial services available to people who were previously excluded. 
1.3 Making use of social collateral 
There was little knowledge among formal-sector financial intermediaries of alternatives to physical collateral, until the 1970s, when the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh began using 'peer-group monitoring' to reduce lending risk. 
The model for credit delivery in the Grameen Bank is as follows: 
• Groups of five self-select themselves; men's and women's group are 
kept separate but the members of a single group should have a similar economic background. 
• Membership is restricted to those with assets worth less than half an acre of land. 
⚫ Activities begin with savings of Taka 1 per week per person and these 
savings remain compulsory throughout membership. 
• Loans are made to two members at a time and must be repaid in equal instalments over 50 weeks. 
. Each time a loan is taken the borrower must pay 5 per cent of the loan 
amount into a group fund. 
• The group is ultimately responsible for repayment if the individual defaults. 
• Between five and eight groups form a 'development centre' led by a chair- person and secretary and assisted by a Grameen Bank staff member. 
• Attendance at weekly group and centre meetings is compulsory. 
• All transactions are openly conducted at centre meetings. 
• Each member may purchase a share in the Bank worth Taka 100 
Through this system the Grameen Bank has provided credit to over 2 million people in Bangladesh (94 per cent women) with a very low default rate. (Source: Khandker, Khalily and Khan, 1995.) 
However, peer-group monitoring has not proved necessary to other instit- utions seeking to do away with physical collateral. In Indonesia, government- sponsored banks have successfully used character references and locally- recruited lending agents (Chaves and Gonzales Vega, 1996). The peer-group 
7 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
method of Grameen and the individual-user approach of the Bank Rakyat Indonesia (see 1.4) can both be seen as attempts to lower screening costs by using local 'insider' information about the creditworthiness of borrowers. 
The degree to which Grameen Bank employees themselves implement peer-group monitoring has recently been questioned. It is argued that the reason for the Grameen Bank's high repayment rates is the practice of weekly public meetings at which attendance is compulsory, for the payment of loan instalments and the collection of savings. The meetings reinforce a culture of discipline, routine payments, and staff accountability (Jain, 1996). 
Another means of improving loan recovery is to insist on regularity of repayment. This is likely to reflect the actual income-flow of the borrower much better than a lump-sum demand at the end of the loan period. Borrowers can make repayments out of their normal income rather than relying on the returns from a new-often untested-mini-business. Neverthe- less, where seasonal agriculture is the main source of income, and borrowers face seasonal hardship, regular repayment scheduling may cause problems. 
Microfinance specialists have argued that the prospects for scheme's stability are improved by innovations such as social collateral and regular repayments instalments. Indeed, financial sustainability has become an important goal in itself. To achieve sustainability, microfinance institutions, be they NGOs, government agencies, or commercial banks, need to ensure that the costs of providing the service are kept low and are covered by income earned through interest and fees on loans (see Havers, 1996). As microfinance deals, by definition, with small loans, the income generated through interest payments is also small in comparison with administration costs. To generate profits, therefore, it is necessary to increase scale - in other words, to lend to a large number of people (Otero and Rhyne, 1994). 
1.4 Savings 
The regular repayments on loans required by large non-governmental micro- finance institutions in Bangladesh (including BRAC, ASA and Grameen) provide evidence that poor people can save in cash (Rutherford, 1995a). These intensive repayment regimes are very similar to those of rotating savings and credit associations: steady weekly payments, enforced by social collateral, in return for a lump sum. Loans made are, in reality, advances against this stream of savings. 
By insisting on regular savings, microfinance institutions can screen out some potential defaulters, build up the financial security of individuals, increase funds available for lending, and develop among members a degree of identification with the financial health of the institution. People involved in 
8 
Current debates in microfinance 
such schemes may previously have been unable to reach formal-sector banks, complete their procedures, qualify for loans or open savings accounts. 'A savings facility is an extremely valuable service in its own right, which often attracts many more clients than a credit programme, particularly from among the poorest' (Hulme and Mosley, 1996, p147). 
This evidence that poor people can save in cash has opened up further debate. A distinction is made between schemes in which borrowers must save small and regular amounts in order to obtain loans (termed 'compulsory' saving) and those which offer flexible savings facilities. In the latter case people can deposit and withdraw cash in whatever amounts, and as often, as they wish. This distinction is made especially strongly by Robinson (1995) in her account of the Bank Rakyat Indonesia. 
The BRI local banking system has about six times as many deposit accounts as loans. On 31 December 1993, BRI's local banking system had $2.1 billion in deposits. These were all voluntary savings. By 31 December 1995, there were 14.5 million savings accounts. Savers with BRI bave access to savings whenever they want. 
BRI deals with individuals rather than groups. Its savings programme was designed specifically to meet local demand for security, convenience of location, and choice of savings instruments offering different mixtures of liquidity and returns. 
BRI's local banking system has a loan limit of about $11,000. The idea is that good borrowers should not be forced to leave until they can qualify for the loans provided by ordinary commercial banks. 
In addition, BRI has a system which gives its borrowers an incentive to repay on time. An additional 25 per cent of the interest rate is added to the monthly payment. This amount is paid back to borrowers at the end of the loan period if they have made every payment in full and on time. There is a corresponding in-built penalty for those who have not. (Source: Robinson, 1994.) 
Robinson argues that there is an enormous unmet demand for flexible savings services. However, she also warns that managing a savings system of this type is much more complex than running a simple credit programme. 
Schemes which operate under these 'new' savings and credit technologies are an improvement on the old model of subsidised agricultural and micro- enterprise finance. The story of how they have succeeded in reaching poor people is now the subject of a large literature (for example, Rutherford, 1995b; Hulme and Mosley, 1996; Mansell-Carstens, 1995). That many more poor people can now obtain financial services is a major achievement of these 
9 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
schemes. However, the questions of which poor people have been reached, and of whether poverty has been reduced, still remain. 
1.5 Can microfinance interventions reduce poverty? 
If poverty is understood as low levels of annual income per household, reducing poverty is about raising average income levels. If a particular level of annual income per head is used as a poverty line, poverty reduction could be measured by counting the number or proportion of people who cross that line-who are promoted out of poverty. Providers of financial services who aim to enable people to cross such a poverty line have focused on credit, in particular credit for small enterprises, including agricultural production. 
However, attention to annual income can obscure fluctuations in that income during any given year. Poverty can also be understood as vulner- ability to downward fluctuations in income. Such fluctuations can be relat- ively predictable, such as the seasonal decline in employment for agricultural workers, or a shortage of income and trading opportunities in the dry season or before harvest. Alternatively, fluctuations in income may result from unexpected shocks such as crop failure, illness, funeral expenses or loss of an asset such as livestock through theft or death, or a natural disaster such as a cyclone (Montgomery, 1996). Vulnerability can be heightened by the lack of saleable or pawnable assets and by debt obligations. Interventions which reduce such vulnerability and protect livelihoods also reduce poverty. 
1.5.1 Poverty as powerlessness 
A further dimension of poverty which is often the focus of NGO interventions is powerlessness, whether in an absolute sense or in relation to others. Economic inequality between and within households is likely to be associated with concentrations of political and social power. Inequality can increase whenever better-off people are able to improve their incomes faster than others. Even if the absolute level of material well-being of the worst-off people does not change, relative poverty (Beck, 1994) may increase, and with it a sense of powerlessness among very poor people. 
Power relations are partly determined by norms of expected behaviour. Neither the relations nor the norms are static; they are contested and change over time. Powerlessness can be experienced in a variety of situations: within the household, as a result of differences in gender and age; and within the community, between socio-economic groups, as a result of caste, ethnicity, and wealth. Defining poverty in terms of power relations implies that assessment of the impact of microfinance interventions should focus on their 
10 
Current debates in microfinance 
influence on social relations and the circumstances which reproduce them. Even in a similar geographical and historical context, it is important to disting- uish between the ways in which specific groups of poor people (women and men, landed and landless, particular ethnic groups) are able to benefit from financial services or are excluded from doing so. 
1.5.2 Credit for micro-enterprises 
While there are methodological difficulties involved in measuring increases in incomes brought about by the provision of credit (see further discussion in Chapter 5), studies have demonstrated that the availability of credit for micro- enterprises can have positive effects. A recent survey collected data from government, NGOs, and banks involved in providing financial services for poor people. Twelve programmes were selected from seven countries (six of these are included in Table 1, Annex 1). Households which had received credit were compared with households which had not. The results demon- strated that credit provision can enable household incomes to rise. 
However, taking the analysis further, Hulme and Mosley demonstrated that the better-off the borrower, the greater the increase in income from a micro- enterprise loan. Borrowers who already have assets and skills are able to make better use of credit. The poorest are less able to take risks or use credit to increase their income. Indeed, some of the poorest borrowers interviewed became worse off as a result of micro-enterprise credit, which exposed these vulnerable people to high risks. For them, business failure was more likely to provoke a livelihood crisis than it was for borrowers with a more secure asset base. Specific crises included bankruptcy, forced seizure of assets, and unofficial pledging of assets to other members of a borrowing group. There have even been reports of suicide following peer-group pressure to repay failed loans (Hulme and Mosley, 1996, pp120-122). 
A much smaller survey comparing micro-enterprise programmes in El Salvador and Vanuatu found that the development of successful enterprises and the improvement of the incomes of very poor people were conflicting rather than complementary objectives. By selecting those most likely to be successful for credit and training, the programmes inevitably moved away from working with the poorest people (Tomlinson, 1995). Reviews of Oxfam's experiences with income-generating projects for women raised serious questions about the profitability of such activities. Full input costings, which would have revealed many income-generating projects as loss- making, were not carried out. Omissions included depreciation on capital, the opportunity cost of labour (the earnings participants could have had through spending the time on other activities), and subsidisation of income- 
11 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
generating projects with income from other sources. Market research and training in other business skills had often been inadequate (Piza Lopez and March, 1990; Mukhopadhyay and March, 1992). 
1.5.3 Reaching the poorest 
Whether income promotion is based on loans for individual micro-enterprises or on group-based income generation projects, its appropriateness as a strategy for poverty reduction in the case of the poorest people is questionable. Other evidence suggests that self-selected groups for peer-monitoring have not been inclusive of the poorest people (Montgomery, 1995). People select those with whom they want to form a group on the basis of their own know- ledge of the likelihood that these people will make timely payment of loan and savings instalments: X will only have Y in her group if she believes Y is capable of making regular repayments and has much to lose from the social ostracism associated with default. This system might well be expected to lead to the exclusion of the poorest (Montgomery, op. cit.). Even the low asset and land-holding ceiling which the big microfinance institutions in Bangladesh have successfully used to target loans away from better-off people has not necessarily meant that the poorest, who are often landless, are included (Osmani, 1989). 
So while the innovations referred to earlier appear to have made loans more available to poor people, there is still debate over the design of appro- priate financial services for the poorest. Hulme and Mosley's study strongly suggests that providing credit for micro-enterprises is unlikely to help the poorest people to increase their incomes. However, detailed research with users has found that some design features of savings and credit schemes are able to meet the needs of very poor people. For example, it was found that easy access to savings and the provision of emergency loans by SANASA (see 3.4.2) enabled poor people to cope better with seasonal income fluctuations (Montgomery, 1996). 
Microfinance specialists increasingly, therefore, view improvements in economic security income protection rather than promotion (Dreze and Sen, 1989) as the first step in poverty reduction. ...from the perspective of poverty reduction, access to reliable, monetized savings facilities can help the poor smooth consumption over periods of cyclical or unexpected crises, thus greatly improving their economic security.' It is only when people have some economic security that 'access to credit can help them move out of poverty by improving the productivity of their enterprises or creating new sources of livelihood' (Bennet and Cuevas, 1996, authors' emphasis). 
Current debates in microfinance 
1.6 Financial interventions and social change 
Interventions have an impact on social relations partly through their econ- omic effects. In many instances implementors of credit schemes have claimed that the work will lead to progressive social change, for example by empow- ering women and changing gender relations in the household and in the community (Ackerly, 1995). In five out of the six schemes summarised in Table 1 (Annex 1), over half of the borrowers were women. 
Much of the work that has been done in assessing the impact of credit programmes on women has been in Bangladesh. One approach was to look at the control women retained over loans extended to them by four different credit programmes: the Grameen Bank, BRAC, a large government scheme (the Rural Poor Programme RD-12), and a small NGO (Thangemara Mahila Senbuj Sengstha) (Goetz and Sen Gupta, 1996). Results suggested that women retained significant control over the use to which the loan was put in 37 per cent of cases; 63 per cent fell into the categories of partial, limited or no control over loan use. Goetz and Sen Gupta found single, divorced, and widowed women more likely to retain control than others. Control was also retained more often when loan sizes were small and when loan use was based on activities which did not challenge notions of appropriate work for women and men. The question of whether women were empowered is not answered: even when they did not control loans, they may have used the fact that the loan had been disbursed to them as women to increase their status and strengthen their position in the household. However, in some cases women reported an increase in domestic violence because of disputes over cash for repayment instalments. 
A second major piece of research has assessed the effect of Grameen and BRAC programmes on eight indicators of women's empowerment: mobility, economic security, ability to make small purchases, ability to make larger purchases, involvement in major household decisions, relative freedom from domination by the family, political and legal awareness, and participation in public protests and political campaigning (Hashemi et al, 1996). The study concludes that, on balance, access to credit has enabled women to negotiate within the household to improve their position. However, unlike the Goetz and Sen Gupta study, which is based on 275 detailed loan-use histories, Hashemi et al attempted to compare villages where Grameen or BRAC were present with villages where they were not. Because of difficulties inherent in finding perfect control villages (which the authors acknowledge), the conclusions of the study do not signify the end of the debate. 
It has also been argued that focusing on women is much more to do with financial objectives than with the aim of empowerment. According to 
13 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
Rutherford (1995b) the real reasons for targeting women in Bangladesh are that they are seen as accessible (being at home during working hours); more likely to repay on time; more pliable and patient than men; and cheaper to service (as mainly female staff can be hired). 
Thus the process of loan supervision and recovery may be deliberately internalised inside the household (Goetz and Sen Gupta, op. cit.). Goetz and Sen Gupta do not use this as an argument against the provision of finance for women in Bangladesh, but rather suggest that to avoid aggravating gender- based conflict, loans should be given to men directly as well as to women and, at the same time, that efforts should be made to change men's attitudes to women's worth. 
1.7 Treading carefully in microfinance interventions 
This brief summary of evidence and argument suggests that microfinance interventions may increase incomes, contribute to individual and household livelihood security, and change social relations for the better. But that they can not always be assumed to be doing so. Financial services are not always the most appropriate intervention. The poorest, in particular, often face pressing needs in terms of primary health care, education, and employment opportunities. Lipton has recently argued for anti-poverty resources to be allocated across sectors on the basis that a concentration on a single interven- tion mechanism, say credit, is much less effective in poverty reduction than simultaneous credit, primary health, and education work, even if this entails narrowing geographical focus (op. cit.). The particular combinations which will be most effective will depend on the nature of poverty in a specific context. Although microfinance provision appears to be evolving towards greater sustainability, relevance, and usefulness, there are few certainties and the search for better practice continues. 
Decisions on whether and how to intervene in local financial markets should not be taken without prior knowledge of the working of those markets. If the intervention is intended to reduce poverty, it is especially important to know the degree to which poor people use existing services and on what terms. Only then can an intervening agency or bank make an informed decision on whether their work is likely to augment or displace existing 'pro-poor' financial services. If the terms of informal financial trans- actions are likely to work against the interests of poor people (cases in which the stereotype of 'the wicked money-lender' corresponds to reality) the inter- vention may attempt to compete with and possibly replace part of the informal system. However, making such an informed assessment is not straight- forward, as one study of the power relations between informal financial 
14 
Current debates in microfinance 
service providers and agricultural producers in Tamil Nadu demonstrated. Grain merchants based in the market town of Dindigul were found to dictate the terms of product sale when lending working capital to very small-scale farmers, but to be much the weaker party when lending to larger-scale farmers (Rogaly, 1985). 
The structure of a credit market can change, partly under the influence of outside intervention. Rutherford has studied the changing market in financial services for poor people in Bangladesh. Competition between NGOs is leading to users being less subservient to NGO staff and protesting about unpopular financial obligations, such as the 5 per cent deducted from loans by Grameen for a 'group fund'. Private individuals have set up offices imitating the Grameen style but charging higher interest rates on loans than the big NGOS, and also offering higher rates on savings deposits. Private urban finance companies have expanded. Despite the tendency for NGOs to become more like banks, other formal-sector lenders are still reluctant to lend to poor people (see also McGregor, 1994). 
The expansion of NGO credit in Bangladesh has been made possible by the flood of donor money to that country. One study of BRAC showed that loan disbursal and recovery had become more important than group forma- tion (Montgomery, 1996). In 1992, Grameen Bank and BRAC employees were found to be offering 'immediate loans' to women in villages where smaller NGOs had been attempting longer-term group-based finance (Ebdon, 1995). Ebdon attributed this behaviour to fairly strict targets for loan disbursal in the case of BRAC, and in both cases to an imperative for job security for staff and a desire on the part of the organisations to expand their influence and strengthen their reputations (p52). 
This anxiety to increase the number of users can undercut the very basis of the new model: the creation of sustainable financial institutions. Studies of credit schemes have consistently demonstrated that unless borrowers and savers believed they would benefit from the long-term survival of the institution, and have a sense of ownership, repayment rates would decline (Rogaly, 1991; Copestake, 1996a). The sense of ownership is weakened by attempts by large microfinance institutions in Bangladesh to claim territory by encroachment. In India, in the absence of equivalent flows of external finance, thrift and credit co-operatives based much more on borrowers' requirements have emerged (Rutherford, 1995b, p136). An understanding of the way in which the institutions themselves change and respond to incentives is therefore necessary for the design of relevant anti-poverty interventions, including financial services. 
15
2 
Informal financial services 
2.1 Introduction 
In recent years research into informal financial services and systems has significantly deepened understanding of the way they operate and their strengths and weaknesses. A simplistic belief that local money-lenders charged extortionate interest rates lay behind the provision of subsidised finance in the past. More thorough investigation has highlighted a range of savings, credit, and insurance facilities accessible to poor people. The appar- ently usurious interest charges reportedly made by private money-lenders may be explainable in terms of transaction costs, lack of information, and high risk. Informal financial services may be well-equipped, because of local 'insider' knowledge, and lower overheads, to respond to the requirements of poor people; they may also be exploitative. 
This chapter starts with a brief overview of the types of informal services that have been found to exist in a wide variety of countries and social contexts. Some of the broad characteristics of these services are identified, and lessons drawn for the design of NGO or semi-formal systems. In describ- ing informal financial services it is useful to distinguish between those which are owned by their users and those which are offered by an individual, usually on a profit-making basis. The distinction can be a helpful one in analysing the ways in which financial services enable or exploit poor people. NGOs considering microfinance interventions need first to find out what informal financial services are available, and how they operate. Such services are capable of supporting poor people's livelihoods as well as perpetuating 
1 This chapter draws heavily on a background paper commissioned for the purposes of this book: A Critical Typology of Financial Services for the Poor, Stuart Rutherford, November 1996. Examples are drawn from Rutherford's own experience unless otherwise stated. 
16 
Informal financial services 
structures which undermine them. It is necessary, therefore, to understand under what circumstances and to what degree these services are enabling or exploitative for poor people. On the whole, user-owned services are likely to be more enabling than services provided for profit. 
Investigating the scope and nature of existing services is an essential pre- liminary before considering whether an intervention is necessary. However, NGOs themselves may not have the right skills to become direct providers of financial services. Furthermore, financial services are needed by poor people on a permanent basis to enable them to plan and manage their finances; NGO programmes which might be here today and gone tomorrow may be an inap- propriate means through which to provide them. Therefore NGOs should seriously consider whether direct intervention is in fact the best response for them to make. The chapter closes by discussing alternative strategies NGOs might employ. 
2.2 User-owned informal financial services 
Systems which facilitate financial transactions and are owned by their users are many and varied, and range from simple reciprocal arrangements between neighbours, savings clubs and rotating savings and credit associa- tions (ROSCAS), to forms of insurance, building societies, and systems of co- operative business finance. An example of each of these types is described below. All of these systems can be found in a variety of country settings. 
Rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAS) in particular, are an extremely common phenomenon. They exist in almost every country (for example, 'partners' in Jamaica and Britain, bui in Vietnam, and njangi in Cameroon). (See Bouman, 1995; Ardener and Burman, 1995 for detailed and extensive surveys of ROSCA operations in a range of settings.) The principle is very simple: a number of people agree to save a fixed amount of money at regular intervals; at each meeting, for example weekly, each member contri- butes an agreed amount, resulting in a single lump sum becoming available, which is then allocated to one of the members. There are three basic varia- tions in the way in which this lump sum or 'prize' is allocated. First, it can be allocated on the basis of strict rotation between members of the group; second, on the basis of a lottery of members; third, it may be auctioned to the member who is willing to accept the biggest discount. The group will usually meet (but does not always need to) and undertake this transaction on as many occasions as there are members of the group, thus ensuring that each member gets the 'prize' once. The ROSCA demonstrates the basic principle of financial intermediation: collecting many small savings from many people, turning this into a lump sum for one person, and repeating this procedure over time. 
17 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
ROSCA finance is used for many purposes. Some ROSCAS operate to enable an asset to be purchased, such as a rickshaw or fishing equipment for each member, and may have been set up specifically for the purpose. 'Merry- go-rounds', as ROSCAS are called among Kikuyu women in Kenya, are sometimes used by women as a means of accumulating enough money to buy new household utensils or clothes. The technology of the ROSCA is not unique to poor communities but is also used by salaried professionals to purchase major consumption items or assets such as refrigerators or cars. 
A further example of a user-owned device is the insurance fund which makes pay-outs conditional on certain circumstances occurring. These are int- ended to cover large expenses such as those connected with marriage or death. 
2.2.1 Some examples of user-owned financial services 
Neighbourhood reciprocity in Southern India Reciprocal lending may be extended to involve several or even all the members of a community. Among Moslems in Kerala State in southern India kuri kalyanam are invitations to a feast to which the guest is expected to bring a cash gift. When the host in his turn is invited to a feast by one of the guests he is expected to return double the amount (less if he is perceived as poor). In Vietnam one kind of hui (a generic name for various financial devices) involves a similar pooling of resources for one person on one occasion to be reciprocated later by others, at different times. 
Rickshaw ROSCAS in Bangladesh 
Very poor men driven by poverty from their home villages to the Bangladesh capital, Dhaka, often earn a living there by driving bired rickshaws. In the last ten years they have begun to run ROSCAS. A group of drivers forms, and each driver saves a set amount from his daily takings. When the fund is large enough (this usually takes about 15 days) a rickshaw is bought and distributed by lottery to one of the members. In between prizes' the cash is held by a trustworthy outsider, usually a local shopkeeper from whom the members buy their tea or cigarettes. In a further adaptation, those who have already received their rickshaw double their daily contribution. This progressively reduces the time-gap between prizes, and is seen as a fair way of rewarding those members who win the lottery late in the cycle, because their gross contribution is smaller than earlier winners. The extra payment made by the winners is roughly equivalent to what they save by no longer having to hire a rickshaw. 
18 
An accumulating savings club in Mexico 
Informal financial services 
In towns and villages in Mexico neighbours place frequent but irregular savings with trusted shopkeepers. Just before Christmas, the cash is returned to the saver. No interest is paid, but the saver has a lump sum to spend, and the shopkeeper has had the use of the money over the year and can now look forward to a good sales season. 
Building societies for the middle classes in Bangladesh In a lower-middle-class area of Dhaka, 165 employees in the Public Works Department belong to their own building society' which was started over 16 years ago. Each saves 200 taka ($5) a month out of his wages. As the cash accumulates it is lent out to members, who buy land and building materials. Interest rates are high and interest on the out- standing balance has to be paid each month, to encourage modest loans and rapid repayment. But loan sizes are generous and such workers would have few or no alternative sources for loans of this kind. 
Popular insurance: funeral funds (iddir) in Ethiopia 
Originally burial societies, iddir have extended to provide a wide range of insurance services in urban Ethiopia. Aredo (1993), study- ing these in Addis Ababa, estimated that 50 per cent of urban house- holds were members of some kind of iddir. Groups of people come together on the basis of location, occupation, friendship or family ties. Each iddir sets its own rules and regulations but usually pays out for funeral expenses or financial assistance to families of the deceased, and sometimes to cover other costs, such as medical expenses and losses due to fire or theft. 
2.3 Informal financial services for profit 
Those offering informal financial services for profit fall into two groups: deposit takers (often also called money-guards) and lenders. 
What is most interesting about the situation of deposit takers is that, as in the Nigerian example below, savers usually pay for the service by obtaining a negative interest rate on their funds. This demonstrates the pressing need that people have for places to put their savings which are safe and secure not only from physical risks such as theft, fire or flood, but also from the demands of their family. For women, in particular, the ability to save small amounts in places to which their husbands and families cannot gain access (although they might know about them) has been shown to be particularly important. It may enable them to meet obligations in the family or household, such as the payment of children's school fees, for which they have particular responsibility. 
19 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
Forms of lending also operate in a variety of ways, such as money-lenders; pawnbrokers, who take collateral in the form of physical assets; and forms of trade credit and hire purchase. The term 'money-lender' can cause confusion because it conjures up the image of a class of people whose main source of income is usury. In reality, many small farmers, for example, obtain credit from employers, landlords, traders, relatives, and other people who combine a number of economic activities. In some places money-lenders may be a more professionalised class, such as the Tamilians' in Cochin described below, but even in this case it is not necessarily their main source of income. 
Lending money can be exploitative of, as well as enabling for, poor people. People facing seasonal shortages may have only one source of credit, for example, an employer. The employer may agree to provide a loan, but only if the borrower promises to work when required at below the going wage-rate. As described below for Indonesia, crop traders may provide producers with seasonal credit on the understanding that the crop is sold through the same trader at low post-harvest prices. Tied credit of this type, whether in cash or kind, may be the only means of survival for poor people. But arrangements such as these can maintain and even exacerbate inequalities in power and position. In contrast, user-owned devices are likely to be more supportive and enabling, because the profits made are pooled, and shared or fed back into the system, and ownership and control of the funds are in the hands of the users. Such devices are unlikely to be exploitative of those involved, although they may widen inequalities between users and non-users. The comparison with services for profit is clear. 
However, loans from private lenders after harvest may enable small traders to make the most of the increased liquidity in the local economy. This emphasises the need for interveners to understand the workings of real markets and to question untested assumptions. It is essential to find out for which groups of poor people-women, men, landless labourers, subsistence farmers, migrant workers and under what circumstances these arrange- ments may be no more than a means of survival, while supporting wealth creation for others. 
2.3.1 Some examples of informal financial services provided for profit 
Deposit takers: a mobile alajo in Nigeria 
One consequence of Nigeria's current political difficulties is a drop in public confidence in formal banks, according to Gemini News. This has allowed an old tradition to flourish again- alajos, or peripatetic deposit takers. Idowu Alakpere uses a bicycle to go 
20 
Informal financial services 
door-to-door round the outer suburb of Lagos where he lives. He has 
500 customers who each save about 10 or 15 naira with him (about 50 to 75 cents US) at each daily visit. Customers withdraw money whenever they like, and Idowu charges them one day's savings per month, which he deducts from the withdrawal. Since deposits are made evenly over the month, the negative interest rate for one-month deposits is 1/15, or 6.6 per cent a month, an Annual Percentage Rate (APR) of 80 per cent. Some alajos, including Idowu, store the cash in a reliable bank, others use it to make loans. The Gemini News reporter was told by many local people that they trusted these alajos more than banks. When it was pointed out that some alajos are dishonest, they retorted that so are many banks. 
Professional money-lenders in Cochin, India 
'Tamilians' provide a money-lending service to poor slum dwellers on a daily basis. They have set terms, which are well-known all over Cochin. For each 100 rupees lent, 3 rupees are deducted at source as a fee. Thereafter, 12.50 rupees per week must be repaid for ten weeks. This works out at an APR of 300 per cent (28 rupees paid on an average size loan of 48.50 rupees [97/2) for 10/52 of a year). Most non-poor observers regard this rate as outrageously exploitative. However, poor users of the service tend to take a favourable view of it. The 'Tamilians' do not needlessly harass their clients over repay- ment but take an 'understanding' view which includes a willingness to accept loan losses. These money-lenders know their clients well and (out of self-interest) will not lend more than they think the client can repay out of normal income over the next ten weeks. 
Lending against collateral: pawnbrokers in Western India Residents of the slums of Vijayawada use their local pawnbroker when they need money quickly. He is reliably available at his gold- smithing shop and he charges 3 per cent a month for loans pledged against gold, 5 per cent for silver and 9 per cent for brass. The inclu- sion of brass means that even the very poor can get a small advance by pawning kitchen pots and pans. He lends up to two-thirds the value of the pawn. He gives a receipt, and because the borrower can be sure of getting her pawn back when she repays the loan, she can risk pawning objects of sentimental value. Unlike those who lend without collateral the broker does not need to know his clients well: the unambiguous collateral provided by the pawn means that the broker can lend to more or less anyone at any time. 
21 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
Advance crop sales in Indonesia 
A practice common in many countries is known as ijon in some areas of Indonesia. Farmers often need cash to get them through the 'bungry' season when their main crop is in the ground and there is not much else to do except sit and wait. They are forced to make an advance sale of the crop, usually to a grain buyer or his agent. Ijon transactions of this sort, if seen as loans, show an interest rate of anything from 10 to 40 per cent a month. 
(Source: Bouman and Moll in Adams and Fitchett, 1992.) 
Two examples of trade credit 
In many markets it is common to see poor people squatting on the ground with a small amount of fertiliser spread out on a mat. The fertiliser doesn't necessarily belong to the man or woman (or, often, child). Lacking capital themselves to buy stock, such people obtain the fertiliser on credit from a nearby shop. At the close of the market they return the money from sales and any balance of the stock to the shopkeeper, retaining a small proportion of the money. The system allows people to trade (safely if not profitably) without capital, and gives the shopkeeper a cheap extra outlet. 
The dadon credit system used to finance prawn cultivation in Bangladesh is an example of a trading system in which credit is passed on through a chain of intermediaries between the prawn farmer and exporters to Europe. The prawn market is a highly com- petitive business in which everyone in the chain is short of capital. The 'commission agent' at the port buys prawns on behalf of the exporters in the capital. To ensure their share of the market they provide credit early in the season which finds its way through a number of intermediaries before reaching the hands of the farmer. The intermediaries are 'depot' owners, then farias', or merchants, and finally local traders, who in turn lend to the farmers. In accepting the credit the farmer commits himself to selling exclusively to this particular trader. 
2.4 Turning the informal into the formal 
In some countries such informal systems have evolved into formal systems which have had a major impact on their users. In the UK, for example, 'mutual' or friendly societies which began as small thrift groups in the nineteenth century turned into building societies in the first half of the twentieth, and have been the main source of housing finance for 50 years. 
Informal financial services 
There are further examples of such informal systems becoming increas- ingly formalised. Aredo (1993) reports that the iddir in Addis Ababa run by the Ethiopia Teachers' Association is of the scale of a medium-size insurance business. In Cameroon some of the traditional ROSCAS known as njangi have evolved into small banks offering finance for small businesses which have difficulty using formal banks (Haggblade, 1978). ROSCAS may thus be a transitional phenomenon. 
Chit funds in India are a formalised version of a ROSCA, for which govern- ment legislation exists. In contrast to the ROSCA, members of the chit fund do not normally know each other and are merely customers of the chit companies. The company advertises for and selects members, makes arrange- ments for collection of subscriptions, and holds auctions for the prizes. However, such funds are of limited use to poor people, who lack both the income to pay subscriptions and the social position to gain the confidence of the company. 
The transition to formalised services is not inevitable. Informal and formal arrangements continue to exist side-by-side even in industrialised countries. In Oxford, UK, ROSCAS have enabled people with very limited capital of their own to increase their chances of obtaining a small business loan (Srinivasan, 1995). A detailed comparative study of credit use among low-income Pakistani, Bangladeshi, and Carribean immigrants in the UK revealed enormous differ- ences in their use of financial services. In all cases sources of credit were class- ified into high-street credit, local commercial credit, mail order, social fund, community-based credit, and 'miscellaneous' (including friends, family, and employer). Unlike the Bangladeshis, the Pakistani and Carribean respond- ents reported community-based, ROSCA-like arrangements. Bangladeshi respondents made much more use of formal bank credit than the others, although they had at least as high a proportion of applications rejected, apparently on racial grounds (Herbert and Kempson, 1996). 
Abugre (1994) points out that transition and change can be rapid, discon- tinuous, and turbulent rather than smooth and linear. There is therefore likely to be a multiplicity of arrangements, some of which become formalised, while others die out, and yet others are initiated. The implication for those interested in providing financial services is that such a role must be carefully thought through, and be flexible and responsive to changing circumstances. 
2.5 What can be learned from informal finance? 
Having briefly explored the range of financial services which may exist, it is clear that informal finance is a regular feature of poor people's lives. What can be learned from this? The continuation of a large number of different forms suggest the following points (partly adapted from Adams, 1992). 
23 
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
There is clearly a demand for financial services 
The range of informal financial services available partly reflects the varied requirements which people, both rich and poor, have for financial services. They may also be explained in terms of the actions of people with excess cash seeking to earn income from lending. In some cases, especially where there is a monopoly, or collusion among providers, this can be exploitative for the borrower. Informal services available include savings facilities, provision of credit for consumption, and funding for predictable but expensive events such as marriages and funerals. This is in significant contrast to the services that NGOs have generally offered, which have usually been limited to the provision of credit for production. 
Transaction costs are low. 
Transaction costs are the costs, other than interest payments, which are incurred in making a deposit or taking a loan. They include travel, time away from other activities, related 'gifts' which might have to be offered to bank or government officials, costs in obtaining documenta- tion required, such as land certificates, and so on. Compared to formal services, local informal services generally require very little form-filling or travel. However, the advantage to the borrower of low transaction costs may be more than counterbalanced by their lack of power in setting the terms of a loan, which may be exploitative. 
Informal services impose their own discipline. 
The flow of information locally and the small number of providers of informal finance often act as powerful incentives to users to repay loans or save in a disciplined way. A ROSCA member failing to pay their instalment risks social ostracism from neighbours, friends, and relatives; they may be less likely to receive help from these people in times of severe difficulty in future. 
Poor people are capable of saving 
The evidence of informal systems disproves the assumption that poor people cannot save. Saving 'in kind' has long been a recognised part of people's livelihood management: saving in cash is a necessity of interaction with the cash economy. Indeed it is often the poorest, who are landless or for other reasons dependent on casual, poorly-paid jobs, who gain a large proportion of their incomes in cash and therefore have most need of savings facilities. The evidence shows that poor people are not only willing to save but at present often pay highly for savings facilities. 
24 
Informal systems are adaptable. 
Informal financial services 
The variety of forms and functions of informal finance demonstrates the adaptability of these systems to different economic conditions and changing circumstances. This contrasts with formal systems which often have to be based on a uniform delivery model. 
There is thus much to be learned from informal financial systems. Indeed aspects of these systems have found their way into the design of NGO and semi-formal financial services programmes. In particular, both group-based and individual-based schemes have made use of the 'insider knowledge' of other local people: individual-based schemes, such as BRI, through personal references from local representatives, and group- based schemes, such as Grameen, through self-selecting groups of borrowers (see Chapter 1). 
This brief overview has not identified for whom these services exist - women and men, poor or poorest. The poorest people may find it difficult to save the amount that a ROSCA requires and hence find participation a burden or are excluded. Even if there are a number of people in similar situations, they are often marginalised or isolated and lack the social networks to create their own ROSCA with a lower fee. Indebtedness may also make it difficult for the poorest to save and build up a small asset base - a situation that will be illustrated in the case of low-income and unemployed members of the Ladywood Credit Union in the UK, a case-study scheme described in Chapter 6. There are therefore limitations to the extent to which savings-based user- owned facilities can be of use to very poor people. However, systems that allow flexible amounts to be deposited are more likely to be appropriate. 
2.6 Deciding when and how to intervene 
Before going on to discuss ways of intervening which are useful and relevant to poor people (see Chapter 3), it is necessary to issue some warnings. Several commentators, among them NGO practitioners, have questioned the appropri- ateness of NGOs acting as providers of financial services. Abugre (1992) identifies a range of dangers, and points to the dire consequences of the job being done badly: 
⚫ NGOs remain averse to charging positive real interest rates and may, consciously or otherwise, undermine traditional financial systems. 
⚫ NGOs do not submit themselves to the discipline required for the 
provision of sustainable financial services. 
25
Microfinance and Poverty Reduction 
⚫ Schemes are managed by entirely unprofessional and untrained staff and 
are often carelessly conceived, designed, and implemented. 
. There are cases where NGOs have flooded the market with credit, 
resulting in indebtedness on the part of borrowers, and potentially regressive effects on income and wealth distribution. By extending loans which poor people are unable to pay due to factors beyond their control, or which may have simply been inappropriate in the first place, NGOs can cause a level of indebtedness which may result in the borrower having to liquidate assets in order to repay. 
Abugre therefore warns against the hasty introduction of new financial services by NGOs and concludes that they should concentrate on what they do well, such as providing social services and acting as confidence brokers in coinmunities. 
Direct provision may be a risky and problematic strategy for an NGO, particularly as the NGO may not have the range of skills required to develop microfinance interventions, nor experience of the financial skills and respon- sibility required to ensure funds are properly safeguarded and accounted for. A further range of managerial skills are also necessary in managing a portfolio of financial assets such as loans and deposits. NGOS with experience of welfare and relief have more experience of channelling funds than managing them (Bouman, 1995). An NGO must ask itself whether it has the skills to become a banker.. 
An organisation lacking the relevant skills may consider acquiring them either through recruitment or staff development. Such a strategy itself has important consequences. These skills may be in short supply and recruit- ment prove difficult; they take time to develop and are acquired through experience as well as training. There is often a strong impetus to start work even if the skills of staff are still weak. This can endanger the intervention itself since it is at this early stage that users gain an impression of the nature of the operation, and inexperienced staff are likely to make mistakes. 
Embarking on direct intervention also raises questions about the long-term sustainability of the service on offer. Financial services should not be provided on a transient or temporary basis. There needs to be a degree of permanence to enable people to plan for their future finan- cial needs. Consideration of the long-term future for a system of finan- cial service provision is therefore important at the outset. Direct provision by an NGO which expects to move away from the area would seldom be appropriate. 
26 
Informal financial services 
There is a further range of issues at the level of the macro-economy which should also be considered when deciding whether to intervene. Macro- economic stability is an important pre-requisite for getting a scheme off the ground. Hyper-inflation and economic instability do not encourage individuals to save, and loans under such circumstances are difficult to manage. (However, in Mexico, while formal-sector banks were reeling from massive default caused by the high interest rates and high inflation of 1995, URAC, one of the case-study institutions discussed in Chapter 6, continued to thrive.) Political stability is also needed, since without it there is unlikely to be much confidence in the long-term future of new financial institutions. Before considering scheme design an NGO must also investigate the formal legal regulatory requirements for organisations involved in financial service provision, especially for savings (see Chapter 3). 
2.6.1 Research questions on existing informal financial services 
In carrying out research into the services available, and how they are used, an intervener should try to find answers to a wide range of questions, such as: 
How do people manage their savings deposits? 
Are there savings banks, or deposit takers, insurance salesmen, or savings clubs? Do poor people have access to them? If not, how do they save (for example, gold, livestock). Who among the poor uses them (men, women, landless labourers, subsistence farmers etc)? 
(Extensive use of expensive deposit takers might indicate that the NGO should look first at the reasons why alternatives are not in place: and second at whether there is any possibility for the NGO to get involved, either as promoter or as provider, in savings collection.) 
How do people temporarily realise the value of assets they hold? 
Are there pawnbrokers or are there schemes that allow them to pawn land or other major assets (eg jewellery) safely? Who uses these services? 
(If such devices exist, are they exploitative or enabling? If they are clearly exploitative, there might be a case for an NGO to try to provide or promote an alternative.) 
How do people get access to the current value of future savings? 
Are there money-lenders willing to advance small loans against future savings? Are there ROSCAS or managed or commercial chits, or co-operative 
2 In a background paper commissioned for the purposes of this book, Shahin Yaqub examined the 'Macroeconomic Conditions for Successful Microfinance for Poor People'. The paper is available from the Policy Department, Oxfam (UK and Ireland). 
27 

banks? Do poor people have access? Which poor people use them? (If money-lenders appear to be exploiting users, for example by imposing very high interest rates or linking loans to disadvantageous deals over land, labour or commodities, then there might be a case for the NGO to introduce ROSCAS or annual savings clubs, or work as a promoter of self-help groups or credit unions.) 
How do people make provision for known life-cycle expenses? Do they provide for daughters' marriages, their own old age and funeral, for their heirs? Are there clubs that satisfy these needs, or general savings services or insurance companies that will do as well? Are there government or employer-run schemes? Are there particular expenses for which women have responsibility? 
How do people cope with emergencies? 
What happens when a breadwinner is ill, or when a flood or drought occurs? Does the government have schemes that reach poor people in these circumstances? If not, what local provision do people make? 
How do small-scale entrepreneurs get access to business finance? If so, in what amounts and at what cost? Do women entrepreneurs have access? 
During the exploratory work done to answer these questions another set of information will come to light-the absolute quantities of cash involved in local financial intermediation. This can be of immense value to scheme designers in cases where a decision is made to intervene. For example, information about amounts repaid regularly to money-lenders will be useful in setting loan sizes and repayment schedules for loan schemes. (Source: Rutherford, 1996.) 
Much can be learned from the way in which people are already managing their finances. A further aspect is the social relations involved-the groups of people who get together to form ROSCAS, those from whom loans are taken, and those with whom deposits are lodged. Tierney's work on the Oxfam- funded Youth Employment Groups in Tabora Region of Tanzania demon- strates that the design of the intervention, which was based around groups of people with the same occupational background, did not correspond to the pattern of existing financial intermediation, which was organised around small kin-based groups, each including diverse enterprises. Tierney argues that 'the formation of development groups can, ironically, divert people's energy away from improving their lives, because forming the kind of groups which are eligible for financial assistance is a time-consuming activity involving skill 
28 
Informal financial services 
in manipulating and maintaining public relations' (Tierneyforthcoming). This illustrates the value of understanding how indigenous financial systems operate, before designing a new microfinance initiative. 
2.7 Filling the gaps 
As well as alerting people to the potential pitfalls of intervention, research to answer the kind of questions suggested above is likely to identify gaps in existing services. There are many ways in which such gaps can be filled and below are some examples of financial service interventions in insurance and hire purchase which can be of use to poor people. For those agencies whose motivation is poverty reduction it is important to link the identification of gaps with a poverty analysis to determine who is excluded from existing services and how such exclusion perpetuates poverty. 
2.7.1 Some examples of innovative services 
Hire-then-purchase for the poor in Bangladesh ACTIONAID found, through the experience of running a group- based lending programme similar to that of the Grameen Bank, that many very poor people were nervous of taking a large loan — the 5,000 taka ($125) needed to buy a rickshaw, for example — in case they were not able to repay it. AA therefore devised a bire-then- purchase scheme for such people. AA bought its own rickshaws and bired them out to group members. A rickshaw driver could hire a rickshaw from AA instead of hiring one from a local 'mohajan'. If he then decided to convert bis contract with AA from hiring to buying, a proportion of the total hiring fees he had already paid was denoted as his down-payment, and be took a regular (smaller) AA loan to pay off the rest. 
Door-step insurance agents, Cuttack, Orissa 
In Cuttack, insurance agents from the Peerless company visit house- bolds in low-income areas. They offer simple endowment schemes, which from the point of view of the customers are like accumulating fixed deposit schemes: the customer puts in a fixed amount regularly and then on maturity gets it back plus profits. Life insurance cover is included in the contract. 
'Bankassurance: group-based insurance for the rural poor In Bangladesh, one insurance company is pioneering an attempt to match, in the field of insurance, Grameen Bank's success in lending. 
29 

Delta Life Insurance has been experimenting since 1988 with cut- price basic life-insurance for rural people. Customers are arranged in groups, there is no medical examination and no age-bar, and premiums are tiny and collected weekly. Agents are also involved in Grameen-Bank-style lending and earn an extra commission for the insurance work. In fact the insurance premiums are invested directly in lending (on which healthy interest may be earned). In 1996 Delta was looking for a big NGO partner which could offer the two services- lending and insurance- side by side. Experience so far has shown that demand for such a service is high. Delta is exploring how it can extend this initiative beyond life insurance. 
2.8 Promotion: an alternative strategy for NGOS 
Having identified the gaps in existing financial service provision, an NGO might involve itself in promotion rather than provision. The main alternatives to direct provision of financial services are ones which involve the NGO in a transitional or support role whereby activities such as mobilisation, training, and making links to other organisations are provided. A range of possible approaches are outlined. 
2.8.1 Formation of savings groups and development of internal credit facilities 
Where ROSCAS do not exist or have limited coverage, the NGO might act as a facilitator of their formation or enable them to develop slightly more sophisti- cated systems of internal on-lending which allows savings and loans to take on more flexible formats. This approach has been used by Friends of Women's World Banking in India. In this case the NGO is mainly involved in training and organising the groups. 
Self-help groups (SHGs) are NGO-led attempts to promote savings clubs, or simple forms of credit union. Those initiated by Friends of Women's World Banking in India are aimed at poor rural women. FWWB (or its partner NGOs) persuades women from the same neigh- bourhood and from similar backgrounds to form small groups of 12 to 15 members. NGO workers encourage the women to meet regularly and frequently and during these meetings the women discuss their financial problems and ways of solving them. 
The solution they are steered towards involves regular small savings and the immediate conversion of those savings into small loans taken by one or two members at each meeting. Care is taken to 
Informal financial services 
involve all group members in the discussion and formulation of rules (how often to meet, the interest to be charged on loans, and repayment arrangements) and then to ensure that every member experiences for herself the activities of saving and of taking and repaying a loan. The group is asked to choose leaders who are trained to manage the group's affairs: if illiteracy or very poor educational levels are a problem then rules are kept deliberately simple (fixed equal savings, and annual dividends rather than monthly interest on savings, for example). These preparations are intended to equip the group for independent survival after the NGO stops sending workers regularly to the meetings. Groups which perform well over several months are able to obtain small bulk loans made by FWWB to the group as a collective. Where there are a number of groups in an area, FWWB may help them form a federation' (apex body') to help with liquidity problems: groups with excess savings deposit them with the federa- tion which on-lends to groups with a strong demand for loans. (Source: WWB, 1993.) 
However, although this type of intervention can succeed with agency help, it has yet to be proved whether savings and credit groups which are promoted by outsiders can achieve long-term independence (Rutherford, 1996). A range of questions remain: can they save sufficient funds among themselves to satisfy their own demand for loans? Can external funds be introduced into these groups without destroying their independence? 
2.8.2 Promotion of small-scale formalised approaches National legislation may allow for credit unions (the World Council of Credit Unions has national and regional affiliates all over the world) or thrift and credit co-operatives (as in Sri Lanka, see 3.4.2). Another approach an NGO might adopt could be the linking up of people interested in establishing such services for themselves with other credit unions or umbrella and apex bodies that are able to promote and advise on particular financial services. 
Oxfam Hyderabad worked with the Federation of Thrift and Credit Associations in Andhra Pradesh, encouraging exposure visits to flourishing thrift and credit societies by potential members from other areas. The members now have a source of consumption credit based on their own savings. Oxfam Hyderabad saw its support for linking potential groups with an existing thrift and credit structure as a move away from direct funding of NGOs to provide credit. (Source: Oxfam (India) Trust, 1993.) 
31 

2.8.3 Linking groups to the formal system 
Existing savings groups or ROSCAS may already have bank savings accounts but are unable to take loans because the bank does not understand their operations or believe them to be creditworthy. The NGO might work with groups to encourage them to build up savings and deposit them in formal institutions. The NGO may then be able to work with a local bank to encour- age it to extend its services to groups. 
In Ghana, rural banking legislation was designed to create semi- autonomous local banks which would serve people cut off from financial services. However, the banks have experienced a range of problems which led to only 23 out of a total of 123 being classified as operating satisfactorily in 1992 (Onumah, 1995). 
In 1991 the Garu Bank, a small rural bank set up in 1983 in Ghana, was near to collapse as a result of embezzlement and bad loans. The people of Garu persuaded a member of their own community who was working in Accra to come back to the area and become theman- ager. The Bank is a unit bank and operates relatively autonomously. Share capital of the Bank is owned by the local community, the Catholic Mission, the local Agricultural Station and a Disabled Rehabilitation Centre. Helped by an additional capital injection of $30,000 received from overseas donors via the Catholic Mission the manager trans- formed the situation, and expected to report a profit for the first time. The bank has a range of clients, including local salaried workers such as teachers and government employees. These people are good customers because they take loans which are easily recoverable in the form of deductions made from their salaries at source. 
Alongside these customers, the Bank provides services to some 300 farmers' groups. Some of these groups were originally formed by the local Agricultural Station and the Catholic Mission and bought shares in the Bank when it was first set up. The manager went to meet the groups to discuss their needs with them. He has developed his own approach to the groups, and stresses that they should be concerned with working together rather than just obtaining credit. He has set up his own criteria for lending to the groups: savings balances of at least 10 per cent of the loan amount; regularity of savings as an indicator of group cohesion; and that the group should have been operating for at least six months. Repayment of the loan on time results in almost automatic qualification for a new loan the following year (although be bad refused loans to a number of groups the previous year due to poor performance). (Source: Abugre, Johnson et al, 1995.) 