JUSTICE BREYER, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, and JUSTICE
KAGAN, dissenting.
For half a century, Roe v. Wade, and
Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, have protected the liberty and equality of
women. Roe held, and Casey reaffirmed, that the Constitution safeguards a woman’s right to decide for herself
whether to bear a child. Roe held, and Casey reaffirmed,
that in the first stages of pregnancy, the government could
not make that choice for women. The government could not
control a woman’s body or the course of a woman’s life: It
could not determine what the woman’s future would be.  Respecting a
woman as an autonomous being, and granting her full
equality, meant giving her substantial choice over this most
personal and most consequential of all life decisions.
Roe and Casey well understood the difficulty and divisiveness of the abortion issue. The Court knew that Americans
hold profoundly different views about the “moral[ity]” of
“terminating a pregnancy, even in its earliest stage.”  And the Court recognized that “the state has legitimate interests from the outset of the pregnancy in protecting” the “life of the fetus that may become
a child.” So the Court struck a balance, as it
often does when values and goals compete. It held that the
State could prohibit abortions after fetal viability, so long
as the ban contained exceptions to safeguard a woman’s life
or health. It held that even before viability, the State could
regulate the abortion procedure in multiple and meaningful
ways. But until the viability line was crossed, the Court
held, a State could not impose a “substantial obstacle” on a
woman’s “right to elect the procedure” as she (not the government) thought proper, in light of all the circumstances
and complexities of her own life. Ibid.
Today, the Court discards that balance. It says that from
the very moment of fertilization, a woman has no rights to
speak of. A State can force her to bring a pregnancy to term,
even at the steepest personal and familial costs. An abortion restriction, the majority holds, is permissible whenever
rational, the lowest level of scrutiny known to the law. And
because, as the Court has often stated, protecting fetal life
is rational, States will feel free to enact all manner of restrictions. The Mississippi law at issue here bars abortions
after the 15th week of pregnancy. Under the majority’s ruling, though, another State’s law could do so after ten weeks,
or five or three or one—or, again, from the moment of fertilization. States have already passed such laws, in anticipation of today’s ruling. More will follow. Some States have
enacted laws extending to all forms of abortion procedure,
including taking medication in one’s own home. They have
passed laws without any exceptions for when the woman is
the victim of rape or incest. Under those laws, a woman
will have to bear her rapist’s child or a young girl her father’s—no matter if doing so will destroy her life. So too,
after today’s ruling, some States may compel women to
carry to term a fetus with severe physical anomalies—for
example, one afflicted with Tay-Sachs disease, sure to die 
within a few years of birth. States may even argue that a
prohibition on abortion need make no provision for protecting a woman from risk of death or physical harm. Across a
vast array of circumstances, a State will be able to impose
its moral choice on a woman and coerce her to give birth to
a child.
Enforcement of all these draconian restrictions will also
be left largely to the States’ devices. A State can of course
impose criminal penalties on abortion providers, including
lengthy prison sentences. But some States will not stop
there. Perhaps, in the wake of today’s decision, a state law
will criminalize the woman’s conduct too, incarcerating or
fining her for daring to seek or obtain an abortion. And as
Texas has recently shown, a State can turn neighbor
against neighbor, enlisting fellow citizens in the effort to
root out anyone who tries to get an abortion, or to assist
another in doing so.
Today’s decision, the majority says,
permits “each State” to address abortion as it pleases. That is cold comfort, of course, for the poor woman
who cannot get the money to fly to a distant State for a procedure. Above all others, women lacking financial resources will suffer from today’s decision. In any event, interstate restrictions will also soon be in the offing. After
this decision, some States may block women from traveling
out of State to obtain abortions, or even from receiving abortion medications from out of State. Some may criminalize
efforts, including the provision of information or funding, to
help women gain access to other States’ abortion services.
Most threatening of all, no language in today’s decision
stops the Federal Government from prohibiting abortions
nationwide, once again from the moment of conception and
without exceptions for rape or incest. If that happens, “the
views of [an individual State’s] citizens” will not matter. The challenge for a woman will be to finance a 
trip not to “New York [or] California” but to Toronto.
Whatever the exact scope of the coming laws, one result
of today’s decision is certain: the curtailment of women’s
rights, and of their status as free and equal citizens. Yesterday, the Constitution guaranteed that a woman confronted with an unplanned pregnancy could (within reasonable limits) make her own decision about whether to bear a
child, with all the life-transforming consequences that act
involves.  But no longer. As
of today, this Court holds, a State can always force a woman
to give birth, prohibiting even the earliest abortions. A
State can thus transform what, when freely undertaken, is
a wonder into what, when forced, may be a nightmare.
Some women, especially women of means, will find ways
around the State’s assertion of power. Others—those without money or childcare or the ability to take time off from
work—will not be so fortunate. Maybe they will try an unsafe method of abortion, and come to physical harm, or even
die. Maybe they will undergo pregnancy and have a child,
but at significant personal or familial cost. At the least,
they will incur the cost of losing control of their lives. The
Constitution will, today’s majority holds, provide no shield,
despite its guarantees of liberty and equality for all.
And no one should be confident that this majority is done
with its work. The right Roe and Casey recognized does not
stand alone. To the contrary, the Court has linked it for
decades to other settled freedoms involving bodily integrity,
familial relationships, and procreation. Most obviously, the
right to terminate a pregnancy arose straight out of the
right to purchase and use contraception.  The majority (or to be
more accurate, most of it) is eager to tell us today that nothing it does “cast[s] doubt on precedents that do not concern
abortion.” 
 But how could that be? The lone rationale for
what the majority does today is that the right to elect an
abortion is not “deeply rooted in history”: Not until Roe, the
majority argues, did people think abortion fell within the
Constitution’s guarantee of liberty. The same
could be said, though, of most of the rights the majority
claims it is not tampering with. The majority could write
just as long an opinion showing, for example, that until the
mid-20th century, “there was no support in American law
for a constitutional right to obtain [contraceptives].”  So one of two things must be true. Either the majority does not really believe in its own reasoning. Or if it does,
all rights that have no history stretching back to the mid19th century are insecure. Either the mass of the majority’s
opinion is hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are
under threat. It is one or the other.
One piece of evidence on that score seems especially salient: The majority’s cavalier approach to overturning this
Court’s precedents. Stare decisis is the Latin phrase for a
foundation stone of the rule of law: that things decided
should stay decided unless there is a very good reason for
change. It is a doctrine of judicial modesty and humility.
Those qualities are not evident in today’s opinion. The majority has no good reason for the upheaval in law and society
it sets off.  Women have reliedon the availability of abortion both in structuring their relationships and in planning their lives. The legal framework Roe and Casey developed to balance the competing interests in this sphere has proved workable in courts across
the country. No recent developments, in either law or fact,
have eroded or cast doubt on those precedents. Nothing, in
short, has changed.