Overview of Spain Permanent Residence Permit
 There are substantial benefits of living in Spain and having Permanent Residency status. Advantages of getting a Permanent Residency card in Spain include having many of the same rights as Spanish citizens. With Permanent Residency you are entitled to work, study and access healthcare.
 

 It does not give you the right to vote in national elections or hold a Spanish passport – these rights are only available to those who hold full Spanish citizenship.
 

 However, obtaining Permanent Residency is a major step towards eventually obtaining citizenship of Spain.
 

 

 Qualifying for Permanent Residency in Spain
 There are conditions that must be met before applying for Permanent Residency in Spain. You should ensure you meet all the criteria before applying otherwise you could risk refusal – which can be costly and impact on future immigration applications.
 

 If you are unclear if you do qualify for Permanent Residency then you may want to consider contacting an immigration specialist to seek advice.
 

 The following are able to acquire the right of permanent residence once five years of continuous living legally in Spain has been reached:
 

 Citizens of a EU state and family members who not EU state nationals
 Workers or those self-employed who have reached pension age – as long as they have worked in Spain for the previous 12 months.
 Self-employed workers who opt for early retirement – although they must have been working in Spain for the previous year before applying.
 Workers or self-employed who worked in Spain but have had to stop working due to permanent incapacity to work.
 Workers or self-employed workers who have worked and lived in Spain for three years and have then worked in another EU country but have continued to have a place of residence in Spain which they have returned to at least once a week.
 Non-EU national family members of a Spanish citizen or EU citizen who have been living in Spain for five years as long as the family relationship still exists – or if the relationship has ended due to dealth, annulment or divorce.
 Documents Required When Applying For Residency in Spain
 In order to be eligible for the benefits associated with gaining a Permanent Residency in Spain, the candidate must provide documentation attesting to their legal residency during the previous five years. When you have completed the necessary duration of time in Spain, you can apply for a Permanent Residency visa.
 

 You must go to the appropriate police station in Spain with the application form and required paperwork, as well as the funds to pay the processing fee.
 

 You must submit your application for Permanent Residence at least three months prior to your present visa or permission expiration. You will be asked to provide the following documents:
 

 A completed application form.
 Provide evidence about your current residency statuses, such as student, employment contract, retired individual, or self-employed person.
 A document that proves that you have resided in Spain for five years – this could be a property deed or a rental agreement.
 Providing a registration document issued by the city’s police department where the applicant resides.
 A document that proves your ongoing residency in Spain, such as a rental contract, utility bills, etc.
 Proof of income, investments, or financial means of support, such as bank statements, tax returns, payroll, etc.
 Provide a certificate of your health and medical insurance in Spain.
 In some critical circumstances, you should be asked to submit a criminal record certificate, as well as a divorce or marriage certificate.
 The consulate general will inform you formally if your application is accepted. Once your application is approved, the police department in Spain will contact you to come and submit your fingerprints and finish the procedure. It may take around one month for your Permanent Resident Card to be issued.
 

 

 Don’t miss out on the chance to call Spain your permanent home. Get in touch with us for help with applying for Permanent Residency today.
 

 Contact Us
 Cost of Applying for Permanent Residency in Spain
 The cost of applying for Permanent Residency in Spain is relatively low compared to other visa charges. The exact amount required by the Spanish immigration authorities varies depending on a number of factors including the cost of getting documents translated if they are not originally in Spanish.
 

 However, you can expect to pay around 80 euros to submit the application.
 

 

 Renewing Permanent Residency in Spain
 Once your application for Permanent Residency has been approved then you will be issued with a residency card that is valid for five years. You must apply to renew this card before it expires otherwise you could risk your immigration status in Spain.
 

 To renew you will need to complete the appropriate form and submit with the following documents:
 

 Proof of address in Spain
 Original residency card
 Passport
 You are also required to resubmit your fingerprints and pay the Permanent Residency renewal fee.
 

 When you apply to renew your Permanent Resident status you are not required to prove you have lived in the country for the five years preceding the renewal.
 

 However, you may have your application to renewl your Permanent Residency card refused it you have spent more than 12 months outside of Spain or another EU member country.
 

 What if Your Permanent Residency Application is Rejected?
 If your application for Permanent Residency in Spain is rejected then you may be able to appeal the decision if you feel that you have met all the requirements and can demonstrate so.
 

 You will need to file an appeal with the High Court of Justice in Madrid and you must do this within two months of being notified that your application has been refused.
 

 This could be a potentially lengthy process so you should seek advice from Spanish immigration experts to ensure you complete the appeal process correctly and increase your chances of a successful outcome.