On July 20, 2022, the House Energy and Commerce Committee voted 53-2 to advance the American Data
Privacy and Protection Act (ADPPA), H.R. 8152, to the full House of Representatives. The ADPPA would
create a comprehensive federal consumer privacy framework. Some commentators have noted the bill’s
novel compromises on two issues that have impeded previous attempts to create a national privacy
framework: whether to preempt state privacy laws and whether to create a private right of action.
The bipartisan bill is co-sponsored by House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Frank Pallone,
Jr. and Ranking Member Cathy McMorris Rogers, and is promoted in the Senate by Commerce
Committee Ranking Member Roger Wicker. In a joint statement, Representatives Pallone and McMorris
Rodgers and Senator Wicker described the bill as “strik[ing] a meaningful balance” on key issues. Senate
Commerce Committee Chair Maria Cantwell has critiqued the ADPPA as having “major enforcement
holes,” prompting other commentators to question whether the Senate will pass the bill.
This Sidebar first provides a summary of the version of the ADPPA ordered to be reported by the House
Commerce Committee on July 20. It then compares several of the bill’s key provisions to other privacy
bills from the 117th and 116th Congresses before examining some considerations for Congress.
Summary of the Bill
The ADPPA would govern how companies across different industries treat consumer data. While not an
exhaustive summary, some key facets of the bill are as follows:
 Covered Entities. The bill would apply to most entities, including nonprofits and
common carriers. Some entities, such as those defined as large data holders that meet
certain thresholds and service providers that use data on behalf of other entities
(including covered entities, government entities, and other service providers), would face
different or additional requirements.
 Covered Data. The bill would apply to information that “identifies or is linked or
reasonably linkable” to an individual.
 Duties of Loyalty. The bill would prohibit covered entities from collecting, using, or
transferring covered data beyond what is reasonably necessary and proportionate to
provide a service requested by the individual, unless the collection, use, or disclosure
would fall under one of seventeen permissible purposes. It also would create special
protections for certain types of sensitive covered data, defined as sixteen different
categories of data. Among other things, the bill would require covered entities to get a
consumer’s affirmative, express consent before transferring their sensitive covered data to
a third party, unless a specific exception applies.
 Transparency. The bill would require covered entities to disclose, among other things,
the type of data they collect, what they use it for, how long they retain it, and whether
they make the data accessible to the People’s Republic of China, Russia, Iran, or North
Korea.
 Consumer Control and Consent. The bill would give consumers various rights over
covered data, including the right to access, correct, and delete their data held by a
particular covered entity. It would further require covered entities to give consumers an
opportunity to object before the entity transfers their data to a third party or targets
advertising toward them.
 Youth Protections. The bill would create additional data protections for individuals under
age 17, including a prohibition on targeted advertising, and it would establish a Youth
Privacy and Marketing Division at the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). These
additional protections would only apply when the covered entity knows the individual in
question is under age 17, though certain social media companies or large data holders
would be deemed to “know” an individual’s age in more circumstances.
 Third-Party Collecting Entities. The bill would create specific obligations for third-party
collecting entities, which are entities whose main source of revenue comes from
processing or transferring data that they do not directly collect from consumers (e.g., data
brokers). These entities would have to comply with FTC auditing regulations and, if they
collect data above the threshold amount of individuals or devices, would have to register
with the FTC. The FTC would establish a searchable registry of third-party collecting
entities and a “Do Not Collect” mechanism by which individuals could request that all
registered entities refrain from collecting covered data relating to the individual.
The ADPPA has bipartisan support, and various interest groups and commentators, such as the Electronic
Privacy Information Center, the Center for Democracy & Technology, and the Washington Post’s editorial
board, have expressed enthusiasm for the bill. In an August 25 letter to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi,
forty-eight different public interest groups urged Congress to move the ADPPA forward through
Congress, stating that the bill is a “meaningful compromise” and that a failure to act may “forestall
progress on this issue for years to come.” At the same time, some Members of Congress and other
commentators have raised concerns with the bill. Senators Cantwell and Schatz, for example, have both
criticized the bill’s failure to impose a “duty of loyalty” on covered entities. While the ADPPA has
various requirements that are classified under a “Duty of Loyalty” heading, these requirements differ
from those included in COPRA or the Data Care Act. COPRA’s “duty of loyalty” would prohibit
businesses from engaging in “harmful” data practices, which the bill defines to mean using covered data
“in a manner that causes or is likely to cause” injury to the subject of the covered data. The Data Care 
Act’s “duty of loyalty” would prohibit covered providers from using data in a way that would “benefit the
[provider] to the detriment of the end user” and would “result in reasonably foreseeable and material
physical harm” or “be unexpected and highly offensive” to the end user. The ADPPA’s “Duty of Loyalty”
imposes a data minimization requirement and defines several specific prohibited data practices, but it
does not broadly prohibit providers from acting in ways that could harm individuals.
Some have also raised concerns over the ADPPA’s preemption provisions. The Attorney General of
California sent Congress a letter co-signed by nine other state attorneys general criticizing the ADPPA
because it would set a “ceiling” for privacy rights rather than a “floor.” These state attorneys general
argue that states should be allowed to adopt their own privacy laws so they can “legislate responsively” to
changes in technology and practices. In the Commerce Committee’s July 20 markup of the ADPPA, some
Members expressed similar concerns over the ADPPA’s preemption of state law. Other Members and
commentators have pushed back on these criticisms, pointing to the strengths of the ADPPA’s protections
and the importance of setting a federal standard.