Sickle cell disease results from a homozygous missense mutation in the β-globin gene that causes polymerization of hemoglobin S. Gene therapy for patients with this disorder is complicated by the complex cellular abnormalities and challenges in achieving effective, persistent inhibition of polymerization of hemoglobin S. We describe our first patient treated with lentiviral vector–mediated addition of an antisickling β-globin gene into autologous hematopoietic stem cells. Adverse events were consistent with busulfan conditioning. Fifteen months after treatment, the level of therapeutic antisickling β-globin remained high (approximately 50% of β-like–globin chains) without recurrence of sickle crises and with correction of the biologic hallmarks of the disease. (Funded by Bluebird Bio and others; HGB-205 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02151526.)
 Sickle cell disease is among the most prevalent inherited monogenic disorders. Approximately 90,000 people in the United States have sickle cell disease, and worldwide more than 275,000 infants are born with the disease annually.1,2 Sickle cell disease was the first disease for which the molecular basis was identified: a single amino acid substitution in “adult” βA-globin (Glu6Val) stemming from a single base substitution (A→T) in the first exon of the human βA-globin gene (HBB) was discovered in 1956.3 Sickle hemoglobin (HbS) polymerizes on deoxygenation, reducing the deformability of red cells. Patients have intensely painful vaso-occlusive crises, leading to irreversible organ damage, poor quality of life, and reduced life expectancy. Hydroxyurea, a cytotoxic agent that is capable of boosting fetal hemoglobin levels in some patients, is the only disease-modifying therapy approved for sickle cell disease.4
 Allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation currently offers the only curative option for patients with severe sickle cell disease.5,6 However, fewer than 18% of patients have access to a matched sibling donor.7,8 Therapeutic ex vivo gene transfer into autologous hematopoietic stem cells, referred to here as gene therapy, may provide a long-term and potentially curative treatment for sickle cell disease.9
 We previously reported proof of effective, sustained gene therapy in mouse models of sickle cell disease by lentiviral transfer of a modified HBB encoding an antisickling variant (βA87Thr:Gln [βA-T87Q]).10,11 Here we report the results for a patient who received lentiviral gene therapy in the HGB-205 clinical study and who had complete clinical remission with correction of hemolysis and biologic hallmarks of the disease.
 Case Report
 A boy with the βS/βS genotype, a single 3.7-kb α-globin gene deletion, and no glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency received a diagnosis of sickle cell disease at birth and was followed at the Reference Centre for Sickle Cell Disease of Necker Children’s Hospital in Paris. He had a history of numerous vaso-occlusive crises, two episodes of the acute chest syndrome, and bilateral hip osteonecrosis. He had undergone cholecystectomy and splenectomy. During screening, a cerebral hypodensity without characteristics of cerebral vasculopathy was detected.
 Because hydroxyurea therapy administered when the boy was between 2 and 9 years of age did not reduce his symptoms significantly, a prophylactic red-cell transfusion program was initiated in 2010, including iron chelation with deferasirox (at a dose of 17 mg per kilogram of body weight per day). He had had an average of 1.6 sickle cell disease–related events annually in the 9 years before transfusions were initiated.
 In May 2014, he was enrolled in our clinical study. His verbal assent and his mother’s written informed consent were obtained. In October 2014, when the patient was 13 years of age, he received an infusion of the drug product LentiGlobin BB305.
 Methods
 Study Oversight
 The study protocol, which is available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, was designed by the last two authors and Bluebird Bio, the study sponsor. The protocol was reviewed by the French Comité de Protection des Personnes and relevant institutional ethics committees. Clinical data were collected by the first author, and laboratory data were generated by the sponsor, the last author, and other authors. The authors had access to all data, and data analysis was performed by them. The first author and one author employed by the sponsor wrote the first draft of the manuscript, which was substantively revised by the last two authors and further edited and approved by all the authors with writing assistance provided by an employee of the sponsor. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and adherence to the protocol.
 Antisickling Gene Therapy Vector
 The structure of the LentiGlobin BB305 vector has been previously described (see Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix, available at NEJM.org).12 This self-inactivating lentiviral vector encodes the human HBB variant βA-T87Q. In addition to inhibiting HbS polymerization, the T87Q substitution allows for the β-globin chain of adult hemoglobin (HbA)T87Q to be differentially quantified by means of reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography.12
 Gene Transfer and Transplantation Procedures
 Bone marrow was obtained twice from the patient to collect sufficient stem cells for gene transfer and backup (6.2×108 per kilogram and 5.4×108 per kilogram, respectively, of total nucleated cells obtained). Both procedures were preceded by exchange transfusion, and bone marrow was obtained without clinical sequelae. Anemia was the only grade 3 adverse event reported during these procedures. Bone marrow–enriched CD34+ cells were transduced with LentiGlobin BB305 vector (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix).13 The mean vector copy numbers for the two batches of transduced cells were 1.0 and 1.2 copies per cell.
 The patient underwent myeloablation with intravenous busulfan (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix). The total busulfan area under the curve achieved was 19,363 μmol per minute. After a 2-day washout period, transduced CD34+ cells (5.6×106 CD34+ cells per kilogram) were infused. Red-cell transfusions were to be continued after transplantation until a large proportion of HbAT87Q (25 to 30% of total hemoglobin) was detected.
 The patient was followed for engraftment; toxic effects (graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.03); vector copy number in total nucleated blood cells and in different lineages; quantification of HbAT87Q, HbS, and fetal hemoglobin levels by means of high-performance liquid chromatography; DNA integration-site mapping by linear amplification–mediated polymerase chain reaction in nucleated blood cells; and replication-competent lentivirus analysis by p24 antibody enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Red-cell analyses were performed at month 12 (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix).
 Results
 Engraftment and Gene Expression
 Neutrophil engraftment was achieved on day 38 after transplantation, and platelet engraftment was achieved on day 91 after transplantation. Figure 1A shows the trajectory of vector copy numbers and Figure 1B shows production of HbAT87Q. Gene marking increased progressively in whole blood, CD15 cells, B cells, and monocytes (Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Appendix), stabilizing 3 months after transplantation. Increases in levels of vector-bearing T cells were more gradual.
 Figure 1
 

 Engraftment with Transduced Cells and Therapeutic Gene Expression in the Patient.
 HbAT87Q levels also increased steadily (Figure 1B) and red-cell transfusions were discontinued, with the last transfusion on day 88. Levels of HbAT87Q reached 5.5 g per deciliter (46%) at month 9 and continued to increase to 5.7 g per deciliter (48%) at month 15, with a reciprocal decrease in HbS levels to 5.5 g per deciliter (46%) at month 9 and 5.8 g per deciliter (49%) at month 15. Total hemoglobin levels were stable between 10.6 and 12.0 g per deciliter after post-transplantation month 6. Fetal hemoglobin levels remained below 1.0 g per deciliter.