OVERVIEW
The following overview is a high-level discussion of our operating results, as well as some of the trends and drivers that affect
our business. Management believes that an understanding of these trends and drivers provides important context for our results
for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2024, as well as our future prospects. This summary is not intended to be exhaustive, nor is
it intended to be a substitute for the detailed discussion and analysis provided elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including in the
“Business” section and the “Risk Factors” above, the remainder of “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”)” or the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes.
About Electronic Arts
Electronic Arts is a global leader in digital interactive entertainment. We develop, market, publish and deliver games, content
and services that can be experienced on game consoles, PCs, mobile phones and tablets. At our core is a portfolio of intellectual
property from which we create innovative games and experiences that deliver high-quality entertainment and drive engagement
across our network of hundreds of millions of unique active accounts. Our portfolio includes brands that we either wholly own
(such as Apex Legends, Battlefield, and The Sims) or license from others (such as the licenses within EA SPORTS FC and EA
SPORTS Madden NFL). Through our live services offerings, we offer high-quality experiences designed to provide value to
players, and extend and enhance gameplay. These live services include extra content, subscription offerings and other revenue
generated in addition to the sale of our full games. We are focusing on building games and experiences that grow the global
online communities around our key franchises; deepening engagement through connecting interactive storytelling to key
intellectual property; and building re-occurring revenue from scaling our live services and growth in our annualized sports
franchises, our console, PC and mobile catalog titles.
Financial Results
Our key financial results for our fiscal year ended March 31, 2024 were as follows:
• Total net revenue was $7,562 million, up 2 percent year-over-year.
• Live services and other net revenue was $5,547 million, up 1 percent year-over-year.
• Gross margin was 77.4 percent, up 2 percentage points year-over-year.
• Operating expenses were $4,334 million, up 1 percent year-over-year.
• Operating income was $1,518 million, up 14 percent year-over-year.
• Net income was $1,273 million with diluted earnings per share of $4.68.
• Net cash provided by operating activities was $2,315 million, up 49 percent year-over-year.
• Total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $3,262 million.
• We repurchased 10.0 million shares of our common stock for $1,300 million.
• We paid cash dividends of $205 million during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2024.
Trends in Our Business
Live Services Business. We offer our players high-quality experiences designed to provide value to players and to extend and
enhance gameplay. These live services include extra content, subscription offerings and other revenue generated in addition to
the sale of our full games and free-to-play games. Our net revenue attributable to live services and other was $5,547 million,
$5,489 million, and $4,998 million for fiscal years 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively, and we expect that live services net
revenue will continue to be material to our business. Within live services and other, net revenue attributable to extra content
was $4,463 million, $4,277 million, and $3,910 million for fiscal years 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively. Extra content net
revenue has increased as more players engage with our games and services, and purchase additional content designed to provide
value to players and extend and enhance gameplay. Our most popular live services are the extra content purchased for the
Ultimate Team mode associated with our sports franchises, that allows players to collect current and former professional players
in order to build and compete as a personalized team, and extra content purchased for our Apex Legends franchise. Live services
net revenue generated from extra content purchased within the Ultimate Team mode associated with our sports franchises, a
substantial portion of which is derived from Ultimate Team within our global football franchise and from our Apex Legends
franchise, is material to our business.
20
Digital Delivery of Games. In our industry, players increasingly purchase games digitally as opposed to purchasing physical
discs. While this trend, as applied to our business, may not be linear due to a mix of products during a fiscal year, consumer
buying patterns and other factors, over time we expect players to purchase an increasingly higher proportion of our games
digitally. As a result, we expect net revenue attributable to digital full game downloads to increase over time and net revenue
attributable to sales of packaged goods to decrease.
Our net revenue attributable to digital full game downloads was $1,343 million, $1,262 million, and $1,282 million during
fiscal years 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively; while our net revenue attributable to packaged goods sales was $672 million,
$675 million, and $711 million in fiscal years 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively. In addition, as measured based on total units
sold on Microsoft’s Xbox One and Xbox Series X and Sony’s PlayStation 4 and 5 rather than by net revenue, we estimate that
73 percent, 68 percent, and 65 percent of our total units sold during fiscal years 2024, 2023, and 2022, were sold digitally.
Digital full game units are based on sales information provided by Microsoft and Sony; packaged goods units sold through are
estimated by obtaining data from significant retail and distribution partners in North America, Europe and Asia, and applying
internal sales estimates with respect to retail partners from which we do not obtain data. We believe that these percentages are
reasonable estimates of the proportion of our games that are digitally downloaded in relation to our total number of units sold
for the applicable period of measurement.
Increases in consumer adoption of digital purchase of games combined with increases in our live services revenue generally
results in expansion of our gross margin, as costs associated with selling a game digitally is generally less than selling the same
game through traditional retail and distribution channels.
Increased Competition. Competition in our business is intense. Our competitors range from established interactive
entertainment companies to emerging start-ups. In addition, the gaming, technology/internet, and entertainment industries are
converging, and we compete with large, diversified technology companies in those industries. Their greater financial or other
resources may provide larger budgets to develop and market tools, technologies, products and services that gain consumer
success and shift player time and engagement away from our products and services. In addition, our leading position within the
interactive entertainment industry makes us a prime target for recruiting our executives, as well as key creative and technical
talent, resulting in retention challenges and increased cost to retain and incentivize our key people.
Concentration of Sales Among the Most Popular Games. In our industry, we see a large portion of games sales concentrated on
the most popular titles. Similarly, a significant portion of our revenue historically has been derived from games based on a few
popular franchises, such as EA SPORTS FC, EA SPORTS Madden NFL, Apex Legends, Battlefield, and The Sims. In
particular, we have historically derived a significant portion of our net revenue from our global football franchise, the
annualized version of which is consistently one of the best-selling games in the marketplace. We transitioned our global football
franchise to a new EA SPORTS FC brand in the second quarter of fiscal 2024. Our continued vision for the future of EA
SPORTS FC is to create and innovate across platforms, geographies, and business models to expand our global football
experiences and entertain even more fans around the world.
Re-occurring Revenue Sources. Our business model includes revenue that we deem re-occurring in nature, such as revenue
from our live services, annualized sports franchises (e.g., EA SPORTS FC, EA SPORTS Madden NFL), and our console, PC
and mobile catalog titles (i.e., titles that did not launch in the current fiscal year). We have been able to forecast revenue from
these areas of our business with greater relative confidence than for new games, services and business models. As we continue
to incorporate new business models and modalities of play into our games, our goal is to continue to look for opportunities to
expand the re-occurring portion of our business.