Set-up
The deck is supplied partially disassembled and carefully packaged for safe transport. Carefully remove all
parts from the transport packaging.
Make sure the surface you wish to use the turntable on is level (use a spirit level) before placing the turntable on it.
Fit the drive belt (22) around the platter (3) and the smaller diameter part of the motor pulley (2) for playback
of 33 r.p.m. records. To reach 45 r.p.m. put the belt over the larger diameter part of the motor pulley. Avoid
getting sweat or grease on the belt as these will deteriorate the performance and reduce the belt's lifespan. Use
absorbent kitchen paper to remove any oil or grease from the outer edge of the platter and the belt.
Fit the felt mat over the spindle of the platter (3). Remove the transport lock (66) from the tonearm tube.
Store the transport lock in the original packaging so they are available for any future transportation.
Cartridge downforce adjustment
The counterweight (6) supplied is suitable for cartridges weighing between 3,5 - 5,5g (weight no. 00). An
alternative counterweight for cartridges weighing between 6 - 9g (weight no. 01) is available as an accessory part.
Pushing carefully, turn the counterweight (4) onto the rear end of the tonearm tube (7), so that the downforce
scale (4a) shows towards the front of the player. Lower the armlift and position the cartridge in the space
between arm rest and platter. Carefully rotate the counterweight (4) until the armtube balances out. The arm
should return to the balanced position if it is moved up or down. This adjustment must be done carefully. Do
not forget to remove the cartridge protection cap if fitted.
Once the arm is correctly balanced return it to the rest (6). Hold the counterweight (4) without moving it, and
gently revolve the downforce scale ring (4a) until the zero is in line with the anti-skating stub (8). Check whether
the arm still balances out.
Rotate the counterweight counter clockwise (seen from the front) to adjust the downforce according to the cartridge
manufacturer's recommendations. One mark on the scale represents 1 mN (= 0,1g / 0,1 Pond) of downforce.
Please note: Adjust the downforce prior to installing the anti-skating weight.
The recommended downforce for the factory fitted cartridge Ortofon OM10 is 15mN.
© Pro-Ject Audio Systems · Pro-Ject Essential III · Revision 2017.01.03 5
Anti-skating force adjustment
Hang the loop of the thread of the anti-skating weight in the groove of the anti-skating stub (8) corresponding
to the downforce applied to your cartridge and feed the thread through the loop of the wire support (9).
The anti-skating force must be adjusted corresponding to the downforce as follows:
Downforce Groove in the stub (8)
10 - 14mN 1st
 from bearing rings
15 - 19mN 2nd " " "
20mN and bigger 3rd " " " 8
Connection to the amplifier
The record player has a captive tonearm signal lead (12) for connection to the amplifier. Use the Phono input
(sometimes labelled gram, disc or RIAA) on your amplifier. Make sure that the phono input offers correct matching
and amplification for the type of cartridge used. Line inputs (such as CD, Tuner, Tape or Video) are not suitable.
Take care to connect the left and right channels correctly. The right channel is usually marked red, the left
channel black or white. Check the manual supplied with your amplifier for relevant information. The earthing
wire of the tonearm lead should be connected to the earth terminal on your amplifier (if provided).
If your amplifier does not have an input suitable for phono cartridges you will require a separate phono
amplifier stage for MM or MC cartridges which is then connected between the record player and a free line
level input of the amplifier.
For detailed product information regarding Pro-Ject Audio phono amplifiers please refer to the Pro-Ject web
site www.project-audio.com.
The recommended load impedance for the factory fitted cartridge is: 47kohms/MM-input
Mains power connection
The turntable is supplied with a power supply suitable for your country's mains supply. Check the label before
connecting to ensure compliance with the mains rating in your house.
 Connect the low voltage plug from the power supply to the socket (20) on the rear of the record
player before connecting the power supply to the mains.
Fitting the lid
Fit the lid (dust cover) carefully over the hinge prongs and adjust the screws (14) until the lid stays open
where you want it to without being too stiff to open or close.