In this paper, we provide a generalizable distribution of television advertising elasticities
for established products that can serve as a prior distribution for firms and researchers.
Providing generalizable estimates of TV advertising effects necessitates transparent and
replicable estimation methods and an a priori relevant population of products. Our analy-
sis is based on a sample of 288 large, national CPG brands that are selected using a clear
research protocol, and our data sources (Nielsen Ad Intel and RMS scanner data) are
widely used by marketing managers and academic researchers. We find that the median
of the distribution of estimated long-run advertising elasticities is between 0.0085 and
0.0142, and the corresponding mean is between 0.0098 and 0.0261.
We draw two main lessons from these results. First, the estimated advertising elastic-
ities are small, and two thirds of the estimates are not statistically distinguishable from
zero. The estimates are also economically small, in the sense that more than 80% of
all brands have a negative ROI of advertising at the margin. The estimates are roughly
half the size of the most comparable prior study, Lodish et al. (1995), which used data
from the 1980s. This difference is consistent with an overall decline in TV advertising
effectiveness over the last three decades.
Second, our results are robust. In particular, across a wide range of specifications, the
overall distribution of advertising elasticities is stable. Due to this fact, together with the
institutional details of the ad buying process that underlie our identification strategy, it
appears implausible that our results are affected by any remaining confounds.
Our results have important positive and normative implications. A central finding is
the over-investment in advertising for more than 80% of brands, a significant misalloca-
tion of resources by firms. Our data are identical to the commercially available data used
by firms, and hence it is unlikely that firms observe larger advertising effects because of
access to alternative data sources. This raises an economic puzzle. Why do firms spend
billions of dollars on TV advertising each year if the return is negative? There are sev-
eral possible explanations. First, agency issues, in particular career concerns, may lead
managers (or consultants) to overstate the effectiveness of advertising if they expect to
lose their jobs if their advertising campaigns are revealed to be unprofitable. Second, an
incorrect prior (i.e. conventional wisdom that advertising is typically effective) may lead a
decision maker to rationally shrink the estimated advertising effect from their data to an
incorrect, inflated prior mean. Third, the estimated advertising effects may be inflated if
confounding factors are not adequately adjusted for. The last two explanations do not as-
sume irrational behavior, but may simply represent a cost of conducting causal inference
23
to acquire accurate information on the effect of advertising. We view this explanation
as plausible given that unified, formal approaches to causal inference have only recently
been widely adopted. These proposed explanations are not mutually exclusive. In par-
ticular, agency issues may be exacerbated if the general effectiveness of advertising or a
specific advertising effect estimate is overstated.13 While we cannot conclusively point to
these explanations as the source of the documented over-investment in advertising, our
discussions with managers and industry insiders suggest that these may be contributing
factors.
This brings us back to a key motivating question for this research, the long-run viabil-
ity of traditional media markets. The documented over-investment in advertising suggests
a threat to the survival of media markets in their current form, once knowledge about the
small degree of TV advertising effectiveness becomes common knowledge. But our results
also indicate that for a substantial number of brands (34% based on the point estimates),
the observed advertising schedules are valuable compared to the counterfactual of no ad-
vertising. There is a large degree of statistical uncertainty about the exact ROIs, and only
for 12% of brands the predicted ROIs from the observed advertising schedules are positive
and statistically different from zero. This suggests a large option value from adopting im-
proved methods or research designs, such as A/B tests, to estimate the causal effect and
ROI of advertising. Our results also do not foreclose the possibility that advertising can
be profitable with alternative scheduling, targeting, or advertising copy strategies. The
rise of addressable television, in particular, should allow advertisers and researchers to
experiment with individual level targeting in the future. These approaches for improving
advertising measurement, scheduling, and targeting may well ensure the long-run viability
of media markets.
While improvements in targeting technology may theoretically increase the potential
for higher advertising returns, they do not solve the underlying agency problems that allow
sub-optimal advertising decisions to persist in the traditional TV advertising model we
evaluate in this paper. Together with past research documenting similar results in digital
advertising markets (Blake et al. 2015; Lewis and Rao 2015), our work should motivate
economists to further study the managerial and agency issues in advertising markets.