The dollar figures involved are informative. When alcohol is made
on a large scale, as it is for the fuel-alcohol industry (gasohol) its cost of
manufacture is about 25 cents per litre. This is for 100% alcohol. If diluted
to the 40% commonly used for vodka, gin and other distilled spirits a litre
would contain about 10 cents worth of alcohol. The retail price of a litre of
vodka will lie somewhere between $10 and $20 depending on the country
and the level of taxation. Some of the difference is due to the scale of
manufacture, the purity of the product, transportation, the profit margin, etc.
but even allowing for these factors the tax burden on the consumer is
extremely high. Is it any wonder that an unscrupulous operator will attempt
to sell his alcohol direct to the consumer, perhaps at half the normal retail
price which would still give him a very handsome profit? Or is it any
wonder that the authorities crack down hard on anyone attempting to
interfere with their huge source of revenue, their milch cow?
This battle between illicit alcohol producers (moon-shiners) or
importers (smugglers) and the authorities has now become the stuff of
legend. Consider the number of stories written or movies made about
desperate men rolling barrels of rum up a beach at midnight! Or about the
battles between gangsters and police during prohibition days in the United
States! Unfortunately, such stories have been taken too much to heart by the
general public so that the whole idea of distillation, and the spirits made by
this process, is now perceived as being inherently more wicked than the
gentle art of beer- or wine-making. And the “wickedness” is a strong
deterrent to most people.
18
It is understandable why a government would wish to put a stop to
smuggling and moonshining for commercial purposes, that is to say in order
to re-sell the product and avoid the payment of taxes. But why would there
be a complete ban on distillation by amateurs, on a small scale and for their
own use? At the risk of being tediously repetitious it is worth reminding
ourselves again (and again) that distillation is one of the most innocuous
activities imaginable. It doesn't produce a drop of alcohol. Not a drop.
What it does is take the beer which you have quite legally made by
fermentation and remove all the noxious, poisonous substances which
appear inevitably as by-products in all fermentations. Far from making
alcohol, a little will actually be lost during this purification process. Instead
of prohibiting it, the authorities should really be encouraging distillation by
amateurs. And the general public, which is so rightly health-conscious these
days, would be more than justified in demanding the right to do so.
In attempting to find the reason for governments to ban the
purification of beer or wine by distillation the first thing which comes to
mind is the potential loss of revenue. After all, if everyone started making
their own spirits at home the loss of revenue could be considerable. But this
cannot be the real reason because the home production of beer and wine for
one's own use is legal, and both are taxable when sold commercially, so the
authorities must not be all that concerned about the loss of revenue when
people make their own alcoholic beverages.
A possible, and somewhat cynical, explanation for the prohibition of
home distillation is based on the following reasoning: Home-made beer and
wine are usually so inferior to a good commercial product that only the most
dedicated amateurs will go to the trouble of first making and then drinking
such doubtful concoctions. Consequently, there is no real threat to the sale
of commercial products nor to the revenues generated by taxation. If,
however, home distillation were permitted, every Tom, Dick and Harriette
would be in a position to make a gin or vodka which was every bit as good
as the finest commercial product on the market. This could, it might be
argued, make serious inroads into commercial sales and into government
revenues.
Further thought, however, makes it very unlikely that amateur
production of spirits would have any appreciable effect on commercial sales.
For one thing the equipment is moderately expensive and it is necessary to
follow directions rather carefully when using it so it is unlikely that the
19
practice would ever become really widespread. Moreover, many people
prefer scotch, rye, rum, etc. to gin and vodka and it is only the latter which
can be made safely and effectively by the amateur. So, if distillation were
legalized for amateurs, it would probably become nothing more than an
interesting hobby, just like making wine, and offer little competition to
commercial producers.
No, we have to look deeper than this in our search for a reason why
governments have a hang-up about distillation. You see, it is not just
amateurs who are penalized. Commercial producers also feel the heavy hand
of government prejudice and disapproval. This is illustrated by several
restrictions which apply in many countries. One is the fact that the
advertising of beer and wine on television is permitted whereas the
advertising of distilled spirits is prohibited. Another concerns the tax
imposed on distilled alcoholic products --- per unit of alcohol the tax on the
distilled product is much higher than it is on beer and wine. A third
restriction on spirits can be seen in the alcoholic beverage section of
supermarkets ---- beer and wine are sold, and possibly fortified wines such
as vermouth, but raise the alcohol concentration to 40% and the ancient
shibboleth of 'hard spirits' reigns supreme. This is grossly unfair
discrimination and naturally of great concern to distillers. As they point out,
a glass of gin and tonic, a glass of wine, and a bottle of beer all contain
similar amounts of alcohol, so it is inequitable to tax their product at a
higher level.
So just why is there this official discrimination against distilled
alcoholic beverages? Irrational attitudes are always difficult to deal with,
but in order to reform the law we have to deal with it, and this requires that
we try to understand the thinking behind it. The drug involved is ethyl
alcohol, an acknowledged mood-modifier, but ethyl alcohol itself is not
singled out by governments as being the bad actor. The alcohol in beer,
wine and gin are identical and imbibed in similar quantities will have
identical effects in terms of mood modification. No, apparently distillation
per se is perceived as evil, to the point where even owning the equipment is
illegal.
There is only one explanation which seems to fit all the facts and this
is that governments and their officials fail to make a distinction between
concentration and amount. Actually, quite a lot of people have this problem.
Just because beer has 5% alcohol and gin has 40% does not mean that the
20
gin-drinker is eight times more likely to over-indulge than the beer drinker.
The fact of the matter is that anti-social behaviour such as hooliganism at
sporting events is invariably caused by beer drinkers. And many studies of
drinking and driving have shown that the vast majority of those pulled over
have been drinking beer, not spirits. People drink until they've had enough,
or feel in a certain mood, and if this takes five, ten, or even more beers then
that is the number which will be drunk. It is the testosterone concentration
which causes the problem, not the alcohol concentration.
A few attempts have been made to dig deeper into the reasons behind
the official attitude to distillation but it is a frustrating experience.
Invariably the person spoken to seems bewildered by the question, almost as
though one had asked why it was illegal to murder someone. One individual
explained patiently and kindly that it was because the law is the law.
Another made the extraordinary statement that distillation was prohibited
because it makes alcohol and this is illegal. (Of course distillation does not
make alcohol. Alcohol is made by fermentation, not by distillation, and in
any case fermentation to make beer and wine for one's own consumption is
completely legal).