There are a plenty of great smart watches to choose from, ranging from the Android Wear army to the most recent Pebble watches, and the Apple Watch is also selling like hotcakes. With smart watches we can find apps in android watch, download and install applications, Keep an eye on the navigation. Smart watch stay on your hand and inform us what’s happening. We won’t appear tired in meetings [1][2]. 1. Benefits of Android wear smart watches 1.1 Slumber: Slumber just blacks off your screen while our watch is charging. If user is charging the watch overnight, this light will be glaring in user face, and on some watches the continuous display has even caused screen burn-in most Android Wear devices turn on to charge and display a screen indicating the current battery level (Figure 1) [3].
Smart watches are a type of wearable device that allows us to keep our hands free while also allowing us to use our smartphones away from our bodies. The smart watch help to determine the battery consumption of the user’s phone, and Wear power supply Stats can help in calculate the drainage of the phone battery.The app's watch counterpart gives you a barebones view of what's going on with your battery, but you'll want to open the app on your phone for the most information. You'll be able to see how much time you've spent staring at your screen and which apps you've used as shown in Figure 2 [4]–[6]. 1.3Smart Watches as a Calculator Smart watches used for calculus homework, having an accessible calculator are a good idea for calculating a quick sale percentage, tipping at a restaurant, or double-checking your math.A wearable smart watches worn on the wrist has comparable functionality and capabilities as a smartphone. Smart watches are designed to provide features such as accessing the internet, running mobile applications, making a call, communication via text or video, trying to check caller ID, accessing stock and climate updates, providing wellness monitoring capabilities, providing Gps location and position directions, and more, either on their own or when paired with a smart phone [3], [7], [8]. 1.4 Smart phone as a mobile phone finder Apps that help you find your phone are common, but since your watch is linked to your phone, being able to ring it right from your wrist is a great idea. As long as your phone is connected to your watch via Bluetooth, simply opening the app and tapping "Find!" on your watch will ring your phone. You can also use the app to set a notification that sounds on both your watch and phone when they are disconnected. That way, if you're about to leave the house without your phone but not your watch, you'll be warned before making a costly error

The smart watches comprise of E-INK display as the battery life of an E-INK display is 5 days. Interface Touch interfaces are more intuitive to use, and many people use a mixture of touch and buttons. People who work out will benefit greatly from smart watches. Sensors are built into these devices that compute how many calories were expended, Traveled distance of the user, Speed, Pulse rate of the user and location of the user through GPS. Elderly falls are one of the most difficult issues that public health systems must deal with. According to World Health Organization (WHO) statistics, falls are the second largest cause of accidental injury mortality after road traffic accidents. Adults over the age of 65 are by far the most vulnerable to this problem, since falls may have a significant effect on their well-being and self-sufficiency. There are a variety of commercial wearables available now that are especially intended to detect falls (see, for example, the reviews presented ref. in for an analysis of the most popular products). These off-the-shelf gadgets, which are generally marketed as a pendant or bracelet, usually include a help button to summon assistance (a useless function if the patient remains unconscious after an accident). These alerting systems are primarily designed for in-home monitoring through specialized base stations connected to a landline. A monthly charge is needed to offer cell phone service when the customer wants on-the-go (ubiquitous) tracking, in addition to the cost of the detector and (in certain instances) the requirement for long-term contracts. Furthermore, in nearly all instances, the manufacturers do not provide information regarding the detection method used or how the detector was validated. As a result, the real efficiency of these systems for detecting falls has not been benchmarked (particularly when they are applied to the target population—the elderly)
The major issue with a smartwatch-based FDS is that analyzing wrist motions may lead to overestimates, or an excess of false alarms produced by the jerky activity of the arms and hands, which is not necessarily indicative of the rest of the body's mobility. As a result of the compensatory movements of the hands, the wrist exhibits a completely different mobility pattern during the fall when compared to measurements captured by other body positions, fall-related accelerometry signals may be misinterpreted more frequently as those originated by other ADLs and vice versa when the inertial sensor is placed on the wrist.
However, most smartwatches have significant battery and computational power limitations. In fact, autonomy, along with tiny displays, has long been seen as two of the most significant obstacles to wristwatch adoption in health monitoring applications targeted for the elderly. The amount of sensors and sampling rates used in a smartwatch have a direct relationship with battery consumption. As a result, the main limiting issue for the deployment and acceptance of apps that need continuous signal monitoring is the battery capacity (which is typically much lower than that of smartphones). Most activity recognition systems would be jeopardized if the battery autonomy was less than 24 hours, since movement monitoring would have to be stopped before sleep to recharge the batteries. An extra fall detection (constantly running) program may have a significant effect on the battery life. In fact, according to a recent research based on questionnaires completed by respondents in a real-world testing of a worn fall sensor, consumers prefer devices that can operate for at least 6 months before needing to charge a battery.
We examine commercially accessible Smart Watches, where adoption is still in its early stages. With the Smart watches accessing of the social network become faster. Smart watches reduce the number of times and effort of the user in pulling out phone. With the smart watches the calls and alerts are less likely to be missed. The features of the camera, Data may be synchronised with smart phones. Touch interface dominant makes easier to navigate, many use the mixture of touch and buttons are in the smart watches.[1], [10], [11]
