Context: [DIFM Customers
Intersecting our DIY customers and our Pros are our DIFM customers. These customers are typically homeowners who use Pros to complete
their project or installation. Currently, we offer installation services in a variety of categories, such as flooring, water heaters, bath, garage doors,
cabinets, cabinet makeovers, countertops, sheds, furnaces and central air systems, and windows. DIFM customers can purchase these services
in our stores, online, or in their homes through in-home consultations. In addition to serving our DIFM customer needs, we believe our focus on
the Pros who perform services for these customers helps us drive higher product sales.
OUR PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
A typical The Home Depot store stocks approximately 30,000 to 40,000 items during the year, including both national brand name and
proprietary products. Our online product offerings complement our stores by serving as an extended aisle, and we offer a significantly broader
product assortment through our websites and mobile applications, including homedepot.com, our primary website; homedepot.ca and
homedepot.com.mx, our websites in Canada and Mexico, respectively; hdsupply.com, our website for our MRO products and related services;
our websites for custom window coverings including blinds.com, justblinds.com and americanblinds.com; and thecompanystore.com, our
website featuring textiles and décor products.
Fiscal 2023 Form 10-K 2
Table of Contents
We believe our merchandising organization is a key competitive advantage, delivering product innovation, assortment and value, which
reinforces our position as the product authority in home improvement. In fiscal 2023, we continued to invest in merchandising resets in our stores
to refine assortments, optimize space productivity, introduce innovative new products to our customers, and improve visual merchandising to
drive a better shopping experience. At the same time, we remain focused on offering everyday values in our stores and online. To help our
merchandising organization keep pace with changing customer expectations and increasing desire for innovation, localization, and
personalization, we are continuing to invest in tools to better leverage our data and drive a deeper level of collaboration with our supplier
partners. As a result, we have continued to focus on enhanced merchandising information technology tools to help us: (1) build an
interconnected shopping experience that is tailored to our customers’ shopping intent and location; (2) provide the best value in the market; and
(3) optimize our product assortments. Our merchandising team leverages technology and works closely with our inventory and supply chain
teams, as well as our supplier partners, to manage our assortments, drive innovation, manage the cost environment, and adjust inventory levels
to respond to fluctuations in demand.
To complement our merchandising efforts, we offer a number of services for our customers, including installation services for our DIY and DIFM
customers, as noted above. We also provide tool and equipment rentals at locations across the U.S. and Canada, providing value and
convenience for both Pros and consumers. To improve the customer experience and continue to grow this differentiated service offering, we are
continuing to invest in more locations (including continuing to pilot rental locations in Mexico), more tools, and better technology.
Sourcing and Quality Assurance
We maintain a global sourcing program to obtain high-quality and innovative products directly from manufacturers in the U.S. and around the
world. During fiscal 2023, in addition to our U.S. sourcing operations, we maintained sourcing offices in Mexico, Canada, China, India, Vietnam
and Europe. To ensure that suppliers adhere to our high standards of social and environmental responsibility, we also have a global responsible
sourcing program. Under our supplier contracts, our suppliers are obligated to ensure that their products comply with applicable international,
federal, state and local laws. These contracts also require compliance with our responsible sourcing standards, which cover a variety of
expectations across multiple areas of social compliance, including supply chain transparency, compliance with applicable laws and regulations
addressing prohibitions on child and forced labor, health and safety, environmental matters, compensation, and hours of work. To drive
accountability with our suppliers, our standard supplier buying agreement includes a factory audit right related to these standards, and we
conduct factory audits and compliance visits with non-Canada and non-U.S. suppliers of private branded and direct import products. Our 2023
Responsible Sourcing Report, available on our website at https://corporate.homedepot.com under “Responsibility > Sourcing Responsibly,”
provides more information about this program. In addition, we have both quality assurance and engineering resources dedicated to establishing
criteria and overseeing compliance with safety, quality and performance standards for our private branded products.
Intellectual Property
Our business has one of the most recognized brands in North America. As a result, we believe that The Home Depot trademark has significant
value and is an important factor in the marketing of our products, e-commerce, stores and business. We have registered or applied for
registration of trademarks, service marks, copyrights and internet domain names, both domestically and internationally, for use in our business,
including our proprietary brands such as HDX , Husky , Hampton Bay , Home Decorators Collection , Glacier Bay , Vigoro , Everbilt and
Lifeproof . The duration of trademark registrations varies from country to country. However, trademarks are generally valid and may be renewed
indefinitely as long as they are in use and/or their registrations are properly maintained.
We also maintain patent portfolios relating to our business operations, retail services, and products, and we seek to patent or otherwise protect
innovations we incorporate into our business. Patents generally have a term of twenty years from the date they are filed. As our patent portfolio
has been built over time, the remaining terms of the individual patents across our patent portfolio vary. Although our patents have value, no
single patent is essential to our business. We continuously assess our merchandising departments and product lines for opportunities to expand
the assortment of products offered within The Home Depot’s portfolio of proprietary and exclusive brands.
COMPETITION AND SEASONALITY
Our industry is highly competitive, fragmented, and evolving. As a result, we face competition for customers for our products and services from a
variety of retailers, suppliers, service providers, and distributors and manufacturers that sell products directly to their respective customer bases.
These competitors range from traditional brick-and-mortar, to multichannel, to exclusively online, and they include a number of other home
improvement retailers; local,
®
® ® ® ® ® ® ®
®
Fiscal 2023 Form 10-K 3
Table of Contents
regional and national hardware stores; electrical, plumbing and building materials supply houses; and lumber yards. With respect to some
products and services, we also compete with specialty design stores, showrooms, discount stores, paint stores, specialty and mass digital
retailers, warehouse clubs, MRO distributors, home décor retailers, and other retailers, as well as with providers of home improvement services
and tool and equipment rental. The internet facilitates competitive entry, price transparency, and comparison shopping, increasing the level of
competition we face.
Both in-store and online, we compete primarily based on customer experience, price, quality, product availability and assortment, and delivery
options. We also compete based on store location and appearance, presentation of merchandise, and ease of shopping experience. Our Pros
also look for dedicated sales support, competitive credit and pricing options, project planning tools, and product depth and job lot quantities,
particularly for their complex purchase needs. Furthermore, with respect to delivery options, customers are seeking faster and/or guaranteed
delivery times, low-price or free shipping, and/or convenient pickup options. Our ability to be competitive on delivery and pickup times, options
and costs depends on many factors, including the success of our supply chain investments, described more fully under “Our Supply Chain”
below.
Our business is subject to seasonal influences. Generally, our highest volume of sales occurs in our second fiscal quarter, as we move into the
spring season in the regions in which we operate.]