Treatment options include:
• No treatment: Up to 65% of viral warts including plantar warts resolve
by themselves without any treatment within two years of appearing.
Plantar warts that are not causing any adverse symptoms such as pain
should be left alone.
• Salicylic acid paints and gels: These are available in different
strengths. Salicylic acid works by removing the outer dead layers of skin
and triggering the immune system into clearing the virus. Before applying
the paint, the feet should be soaked in warm water and thickened skin
filed away with a pumice stone or emery board. Care should be taken
not to scrape the surrounding normal skin to avoid spreading the virus.
Treatment should be daily for at least 12 weeks and is usually most
convenient at bedtime. The paint /gel should be applied carefully to the
wart, not the surrounding normal skin. Cover the lesion with a dressing
to allow the treatment to work effectively. If the wart becomes too sore,
treatment should be stopped for a few days, then resumed.
• Cryotherapy. (See patient information leaflet on cryotherapy). Freezing
the warts with liquid nitrogen (a very cold gas), may be available at your
doctor’s surgery or podiatrist. Thick warts need to be shaved before
freezing to allow the cold to get into the skin. Ideally, cryotherapy should
be repeated every three to four weeks. It is painful and may cause
blisters and burns, and because of this is not usually recommended in
children. Several freezes may be needed to clear warts and it does not
always work. Using a salicylic acid preparation in between freezes may
improve the effectiveness.
• Duct Tape: Although there is conflicting evidence regarding the
effectiveness of duct tape in the treatment of cutaneous warts, it might still be well worth trying, especially in children. The wart should be
covered with duct tape for six days, and if the tape falls off it should be
replaced with a fresh piece. The tape should then be removed, and the
affected area soaked in luke-warm water and the wart pared down to
remove any dead skin cells. The wart should then be left uncovered
overnight, and the duct tape reapplied once again in the morning. This
can be continued for up to two months.
• Other approved topical treatments for plantar warts include
formaldehyde gel, glutaraldehyde and silver nitrate caustic pencils.
• Other preparations include topical dithranol, podophyllotoxin, 5-
fluorouracil trichloroacetic acid and bleomycin injections.
• Contact immunotherapy with a chemical paint such as diphencyprone
causes an allergic skin reaction that may boost the body’s immune
reaction against the wart virus.
• Surgical removal of warts is an option if topical treatments do not work.
Options include tissue destructive laser therapy or curettage and cautery
after a local anaesthetic injection into the skin. These procedures are
painful and can lead to uncomfortable scarring. The wart may come back
in the scar after surgery.
• Photodynamic therapy and other lasers (Pulsed Dye Laser and NdYAG) have also been used but are not widely available for treatment of
warts.
• Complementary and alternative treatments include hypnotherapy,
homeopathy, acupuncture, and herbal treatment.