Outcome One: An effective, accessible and coordinated health care system built around the needs of individuals, families, caregivers and communities, and supported by competent, accountable health professionals and secure digital information systems Key	Objectives	1.1 Increase	health	system	capacity	and	reduce	wait	times,	particularly	for	publicly	funded	surgical	procedures	and	diagnostic	MRI	and	CT	scans,	emergency	medical	services,	and	intensive	care	units.	 As the province emerges from the pandemic, Alberta Health continues to prioritize health system capacity, including building surgical and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) capacity, as well as the health workforce. Several initiatives are underway to minimize disruptions to patient care and expand the capacity of Alberta’s publicly funded health care system permanently. This also includes preparing to respond more effectively to any future health crises and reducing wait times across the health care system. A resilient, sustainable health system will allow the system to operate at full capacity for longer periods before needing to adjust health care resources. The policy has overall goals of improving access to scheduled health services, improving wait time measurement and reporting, and ensuring timely communication for patients.  In November 2022, Alberta released the Health Care Action Plan (HCAP). The HCAP identifies immediate government actions to build a better health care system for Albertans. In order to meet the growing demands of Alberta’s health care system, an Official Administrator was appointed to Alberta Health Services (AHS) to provide leadership to address the four goals of the HCAP: • decrease emergency department wait times; • improve emergency medical services response times; • reduce wait times for surgeries; and, • empower frontline workers to deliver health care. Since 2019, government has been committed to increasing surgical capacity to keep pace with demand and reduce the length of time Albertans are waiting for scheduled surgeries. Efforts are geared towards improving patient navigation of the health care system through enhanced care coordination and surgical pathways and resources; improving specialist advice and collaboration with family physicians before consultation; and, centralizing referrals for distribution to the most appropriate surgeon with a shorter wait list. Through the Alberta Surgical Initiative (ASI), Alberta Health continues to work with AHS to improve and standardize the entire surgical journey through: • prioritizing surgeries and allocating operating room time according to the greatest need;  • streamlining referrals from primary care to specialists;  • increasing surgeries at underutilized operating rooms, mainly in rural areas; and, • providing less complex surgeries through accredited chartered surgical facilities (CSFs) to provide publicly funded insured services and extend existing capacity in hospitals.  Through these dedicated efforts, the total number of surgeries completed in 2022-23 was 292,500, which is over 13,900 more surgeries than the year before. Further, approximately 22,100 cancer surgeries were completed in 2022-23, which represents a 10 per cent increase compared to the pre-pandemic amount. Nearly 65 per cent of the cancer surgeries were completed within clinically recommended wait times. By the end of 2022-23, AHS had cleared all postponed surgeries due to COVID-19, and continues to work on reducing wait times. The main focus remains on those patients that are waiting the longest out of clinically recommended targets, and the most acute cases. As of March 31, 2023, AHS reduced the adult surgical waitlist by more than 7,000 patients, and the total number of cases on the adult surgical waitlist is 67,186 which is less than before the pandemic. In 2022-23, there were 38 existing CSFs and three new CSF contracts were implemented to expand publicly funded surgical capacity in these facilities. CSFs are an extension of existing capacity in hospitals and used in many other Canadian health systems. Under the Health	Facilities	Act, CSFs providing publicly funded insured services must be accredited by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta, and have a signed service contract with AHS. In 2022-23, accredited CSFs in Alberta provided approximately 47,400 surgeries, which is equivalent to 16.2 per cent of publicly funded scheduled surgeries.  In Alberta and other provinces, wait times for three common surgical procedures (hip replacement, knee replacement and cataract surgeries) continue to be impacted by delays due to the COVID-19 pandemic and workforce shortages. The 2022-23 results for hip, knee and cataract surgical procedures showed a decline, meaning that fewer Albertans received these surgical procedures within national benchmark wait times when compared to 2021-22 results.
The chart below shows quarterly trends for the three common surgical procedures completed within national benchmarks in 2022-23. There were improvements in the number of cases completed for hip and knee replacements over the course of 2022-23, showing increases of 13 per cent and 15 per cent (respectively), and demonstrating significant improvements with the appointment of the Official Administrator and the implementation of the HCAP in November 2022. While the quarterly results for cataract surgery declined in the second quarter, the number has stabilized in the third quarter since the implementation of HCAP and is beginning an upward trend in the fourth quarter, although it is slightly below the first quarter result. Since 2019-20, there has been a 20 per cent improvement in cases completed within national benchmarks for cataract surgeries, ranking Alberta as a top performer nationally.
As part of ASI, Alberta Health has worked with AHS to implement additional measures aimed at improving access and wait times for surgery. Work is ongoing to increase the use of Rapid Access Clinics to reduce wait times for the assessment of orthopedic issues, reducing unnecessary consultations and decreasing wait times for consultations. The Facilitated Access to Specialized Treatment (FAST) program accelerates implementation of central intake for orthopedic and urology surgery to allow patients to see the first available surgeon. Work has begun on the implementation of the Electronic Referral System (ERS), which will expedite referrals for Albertans requiring assessment by surgical specialists. In addition, consultants have been contracted to enhance surgical capacity by improving inpatient surgeries scheduling, monitoring operating room capacity, and reducing patient flow variation. With the added capacity of additional CSFs offering surgeries and implementation of FAST and ERS, Albertans will experience a streamlined surgical journey from referral to consultation to surgery. More Albertans will get their surgery within the clinically recommended wait time targets, thereby reducing the amount of time they must live with pain and other inconveniences. Reducing wait times for medically necessary diagnostic tests is also a top priority for government. Each year, Alberta spends about $1 billion on diagnostic imaging, which includes ultrasounds, Xrays, mammography, MRI and CT scans. About 46 per cent of the $1 billion is allocated to AHS, while 54 per cent is allocated to community diagnostic imaging providers. Approximately one-third of all CT and MRI scans are emergency scans and are completed within clinically appropriate timelines (under 24 hours). In 2022-23, a total of 520,504 CT scans and 231,030 MRI scans were completed across the province. The wait time for both types of scans increased due to a sharp increase in demand and staffing issues. Alberta Health and AHS continue to implement the Diagnostic Imaging Action Plan developed in 2019 to facilitate timely access to CT and MRI scans. As part of the plan, there is a significant focus on triaging patients to ensure that those who need urgent scans can get one as soon as possible. In addition, the Clinical Decision Support (CDS) within Connect Care aims to improve appropriateness of referrals and triage decisions. AHS has reached a five-year agreement with radiologist groups in Edmonton and Calgary to reduce wait times, and signed a memorandum of understanding with the remaining three largest radiology providers in Alberta North, Central, and South Zones. In total, 83 per cent of provincial radiologists have signed agreements with AHS.  As part of the HCAP, the Government of Alberta is working with AHS to improve emergency medical services (EMS) response times. Improved ambulance times means that Albertans are receiving the urgent care they need from highly skilled paramedics more quickly. The Alberta Emergency Medical Services Provincial Advisory Committee (AEPAC) was established and tasked with providing immediate and long-term recommendations that will better support staff and ensure a strengthened and sustainable EMS system for Albertans needing services now and into the future. AEPAC focused on the issues facing EMS, such as system pressures that may cause service gaps, staffing issues, and hours of work. This included issues related to ground ambulance, air ambulance, and dispatch. Furthermore, Alberta conducted an independent review of EMS dispatch (the Dispatch Review) to inform improvements that can be made to dispatch services overall. The Dispatch Review and full report from AEPAC were submitted to the Minister of Health in the fall of 2022 and released to the public in January 2023. The Government of Alberta accepted the final AEPAC report and Dispatch Review recommendations in full. The recommendations were focused on accountability, capacity, efficiencies, operations, performance, and workforce support. Adjustments are being made to improve EMS response times and get paramedics out of hospital waiting rooms and back into their communities. Implementation of recommendations on a priority basis has supported ongoing reduction in EMS response times and red alerts, and improvements in community coverage. In 2022-23, Alberta Health initiated several actions to address these recommendations and strengthen the EMS system across the province. Examples of projects include: • Implemented measures to improve the central dispatch system to better deal with lowacuity calls and prioritize emergent/urgent 911 calls for EMS and made workforcescheduling changes as part of the Fatigue Management Strategy.  • Initiated pilot projects using an integrated Fire-EMS model to maximize the use of paramedics and increase ambulance capacity to the health care system. Examples of the projects included: using inbound EMS resources only when they are clinically required; staffing spare ambulances to support the EMS system during times of stress; and, expanding single member advanced care paramedic response units that provide immediate advanced life support care in anticipation of, or in the absence of, an available ambulance. • Introduced new provincial guidelines, including a 45-minute EMS emergency department (ED) wait time target for 911, to get ambulances back on the road more quickly. The new provincial guidelines enable fast-tracking ambulance transfers at EDs by moving less urgent patients to hospital waiting areas. • Put procedures in place to contract appropriately trained resources for non-emergency transfers between facilities in Calgary and Edmonton, freeing up paramedics. Instead of using highly trained paramedics for non-medical patient transfers to patients’ homes from a facility or acute care, alternative resources are now arranged by hospitals, also freeing up paramedics. • Granted an exemption to the minimum staffing requirements defined in the Ground Ambulance Regulation, significantly expanding the instances where an emergency medical responder can meet the staffing requirements for all classes of ambulance, to alleviate staffing challenges across the province. • Empowered paramedics to assess a patient's condition at the scene to decide if they need ambulance transport to the hospital. In 2022-23, a total of $590 million was spent on EMS. Capacity increases were laid out in the AHS’ EMS 10-Point Plan and recommendations by AEPAC, including increases in paramedic workforce and adding ambulances to the system. As of March 31, 2023, there are 8,417 regulated members in the province registered with the Alberta College of Paramedics, including 1,383 emergency medical responders, 4,050 primary care paramedics, and 2,984 advanced care paramedics. AHS added 19 new ambulances in Calgary and Edmonton and more ambulance coverage in Chestermere and Okotoks, and hired 457 new staff members, including 341 paramedics. Increased capacity helps reduce EMS response times and red alerts and improves working conditions for frontline practitioners and community coverage, especially for life-threatening conditions. Measures to address staffing issues include AHS’ Fatigue Management Strategy, a recruitment campaign aimed at other provinces and Australia, development of a Provincial Service Plan, and interim AEPAC recommendations brought forward in June 2022, granting an exemption to expand use of emergency medical responders and pilot projects to give greater autonomy to ambulance operators using an integrated fire-EMS model. In addition, keeping paramedics out of hospital waiting rooms and in communities has contributed to decreased EMS response times and red alerts, improved community coverage, and quicker access to EMS. The HCAP 90-day Report released in February 2023 (https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/assets/about/aop/ahs-aop-90-report.pdf ) shows an early reduction in response times and red alerts, and greater focus on urgent/emergent 911 calls through low-acuity diversion measures and non-clinical patient transport programs across Alberta, particularly in Calgary and Edmonton. Comparing November 2022 to March 2023, EMS response time for the most urgent calls in metro and urban areas was reduced from 21.8 minutes to  15 minutes. Improving access to EMS enables timely patient care and entry into the health care system.
The government also launched the EMS/811 Shared Response program to ensure patients receive the level of care they need and reduce unnecessary ambulance responses. Calls that have been assessed as not experiencing a medical emergency that requires an ambulance are transferred to Health Link 811, where registered nurses provide further triage, assessment and care. Since the launch in January 2023, more than 2000 911-callers with non-urgent conditions were transferred and helped by Health Link 811, keeping more ambulances available for emergency calls. In October 2022, government appointed a Parliamentary Secretary of EMS Reform to work with health partners to set priorities for service improvement based on AEPAC and Dispatch Review report recommendations. Remaining AEPAC and Dispatch Review recommendations have been incorporated into the AHS Operations Plan and are being prioritized and monitored by the EMS Reform Parliamentary Secretary.  There are almost two million visits to Alberta EDs every year. Alberta Health together with AHS is working to improve patient flow within the health system, in particular to reduce ED wait times. AHS is committed to improving the experience of patients and families from the time they seek emergency care until the time the patient is discharged or admitted. There are 780 more staff in EDs today than in December 2018. AHS is working diligently on several initiatives to improve access to emergency care including improving access to continuing care living options, expanding hospital capacity, and implementing initiatives in hospitals to streamline patient treatment and discharge. In 2022-23, alternate level of care days were reduced by enhancing social work supports in acute care to address barriers for discharge. This included adding a fast-track area at the Alberta Children’s Hospital in Calgary, and deploying additional units of EMS mobile Integrated Health Units in Calgary and Edmonton to provide care for unscheduled needs within the community  (i.e., IV antibiotics, rehydration, and transfusions at home).  In January 2023, the Bridge Healing Transitional Accommodation Program was launched in Edmonton to support transitioning of patients experiencing homelessness as they are discharged from emergency departments. The initiative aims to reduce hospital readmission rates for Albertans experiencing homelessness by providing wrap-around health and social services. This program provides 36 beds to support this vulnerable population.  Over the next three years, $305 million will be provided for additional health care capacity on a permanent basis under the HCAP. This includes approximately $268.6 million in operating funds and $36.4 million for capital projects to increase ICU capacity on a permanent basis. Approximately $61 million was spent in 2022-23 to create 50 permanent new fully equipped and staffed adult ICU beds across the province, which brings the number of ICU beds up to 223 from 173 before the pandemic.  The pandemic has shown that more permanent capacity and staff are needed, particularly in rural and remote areas. The ministry continues to address ICU staffing shortages across health care facilities in Alberta. As vacancies are filled, ICU beds are reopened. Temporary bed closures are implemented only as a last resort, and patients continue to receive safe, high-quality care. AHS filled 392 positions, as of the end of fiscal year 2022-23, to support the new beds. These positions included nurses, allied health professionals, pharmacists, and clinical support service positions for diagnostic imaging and service workers. The latest data available at the end of fiscal year 2022-23 indicated that the provincial ICU baseline occupancy rate was 82 per cent, a 29 per cent improvement from being at over capacity (115 per cent) in 2021-22. Increasing ICU capacity ensures that Albertans receive care when they need it most. However, unplanned temporary service disruptions, including bed reductions, are not unusual in any health system, as services and beds are managed based on patient need, staffing levels, acuity of patient health, and other factors. Government works to ensure patients continue to receive safe, high-quality care. Occasionally, however, temporary bed closures are implemented as a last resort. Government is committed to ensuring that any Albertan who needs acute care will receive it.  Workforce challenges remain a significant barrier to improving wait times for surgery given the high demand for anesthesiologists in Canada and international jurisdictions. Alberta Health is reviewing and developing options to support continued implementation of the Anesthesia Care Team Model in AHS and CSFs. The implementation of the Anesthesia Care Team Model aims to use anesthesiologists more resourcefully for some ophthalmology and orthopedic surgeries by employing a multidisciplinary team that works under supervision of the anesthesiologist to support anesthesia services in the operating room. Recruitment efforts are underway through AHS to attract more anesthesiologists to Alberta, including in rural areas. In March 2023, government released MAPS Strategy, which sets out a framework for supporting the province’s current health care workers and building the future workforce that can support Albertans getting the health care they need when and where they need it. Alberta has various initiatives underway to attract and retain nurses and increase system capacity. Alberta Health worked with the College of Registered Nurses of Alberta to streamline registration processes for Internationally Educated Nurses (IEN) and developed a grant agreement with the Alberta Association of Nurses for nurse navigators to support IENs going through the assessment, education, and registration processes. Announced in September 2022, the Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS) initiative formed three panels to provide advice to the Minister on ways to improve the primary health care system, thereby improving the overall efficiency of the health care system. On February 21, 2023, the Minister announced an investment into primary health care of $243 million over three years; of this, $125 million is allocated for MAPS recommendations. In addition, the Minister accepted, in principle, early opportunities for investment that could be implemented to enhance Albertans’ access to primary health care immediately. On March 31, 2023, the MAPS Strategic Advisory Panel and Indigenous Primary Health Care Advisory Panel submitted parallel final reports to the Minister, outlining transformative strategic roadmaps for the next 10 years of primary health care in Alberta. These reports address both Indigenous access to primary health care and advice on improving primary health care for all Albertans. The intent of the MAPS initiative will be to reorient the health system around primary health care, thereby improving patient outcomes and reducing costs and decreasing pressures on the acute care system in the long-term.  Partnerships and collaboration between primary care providers and specialists will improve patient wait times and health outcomes. The ASI Care Pathways and Specialty Advice, which includes the Provincial Pathways Unit and provincially aligned non-urgent telephone advice service programs, support consistency and quality to ensure continuity of care across the patient journey. The Provincial Primary Care Network provided these projects with conditional endorsement to begin transition to operational shared service programs. Primary Care Networks (PCNs) are also working with other stakeholders on the ASI to improve primary care and specialist linkages and patient navigation of the health care system by building and leveraging PCN specialist linkage programs. Some initiatives include Strong Partnerships and Transitions of Care for the Central Zone; Patient’s Medical Home, including referral navigators; Specialist LINK Tool for the Calgary Zone; Connect MD for the Edmonton and North Zones; FAST General Surgery for the Edmonton Zone; and, Specialist Integration Task Group for the Calgary Zone.  
Modernize	Alberta’s	continuing	care	system,	based	on	Alberta’s	facility‐based	continuing	care	and	palliative	and	end‐of‐life	care	reviews,	to	improve	continuing	care	services	for	Albertans	living	with	disabilities	and	chronic	conditions	(including	people	living	with	dementia).		Government continues to be committed to addressing gaps in the continuing care system, and meeting the needs of Albertans by implementing transformative changes within the system. Alberta Health worked with partners to develop a new legislative framework for the continuing care system. The Continuing	Care	Act (Act), which received Royal Assent on May 31, 2022, will increase clarity regarding services, address gaps and inconsistencies across services and settings, enable improved service delivery for Albertans, and support health system accountability and sustainability. Multiple pieces of legislation will be consolidated into the Act, which establishes clear and consistent oversight and authority over the delivery of continuing care services and settings. The new legislation was proclaimed to be in effect April 1, 2024, except for sections regarding administrative penalties, which will be proclaimed on April 1, 2025. Implementation of the legislative framework will better support Albertans transitioning between care types and settings, including home and community care, supportive living accommodations, and continuing care homes.  The continuing care system in Alberta provides a range of services for health, personal care, and housing to ensure the safety, independence, and quality of life for people in Alberta, regardless of age, based on their evaluated need for continuing care assistance. Publicly funded care options include home and community care; continuing care homes, which includes Designated Supportive Living and Long-Term Care; and, Palliative and End-of-Life Care services (PEOLC). In addition, Albertans have the option to access housing support in supportive living settings, such as lodges, group homes, and seniors' complexes. In 2022-23, 871 new continuing care beds/spaces were created at AHS-operated or contracted facilities to meet Albertans’ needs. The government continues to be committed to expanding the number of available continuing care spaces throughout the province and enhancing the continuing care system to effectively meet the needs of Albertans by incorporating recommendations from the Facility-Based Continuing Care (FBCC) Review Final Report, which was released on May 31, 2021.  Alberta Health has acted on several recommendations from the FBCC review, including the introduction of self-managed care as a way to provide greater choice regarding locations, types and providers of services. Further, Alberta Health has enhanced client choice by supporting more continuing care clients in the community rather than at FBCC sites.  Alberta Health worked with Alberta Blue Cross and AHS to successfully implement the ClientDirected Home Care Invoicing model. This model was implemented in the Edmonton Zone in April 2022, and in the Calgary Zone in the fall of 2022. Expansion to rural areas of the province will move forward over the course of 2023 to provide Albertans with increased choice and flexibility in selecting their home care service provider and the ability to better direct how their care is provided.  In June 2022, Alberta Health worked with AHS to initiate a Request for Expression of Interest and Qualification (RFEOIQ) procurement process to explore opportunities to optimize the provision of home care services in Alberta, as well as identify innovative service delivery solutions to support specialized needs and populations. Albertans will begin to see the outcomes and impacts of the RFEOIQ process during fiscal year 2023-24, as the successful proposals are implemented.
Another recommendation from the FBCC report was to streamline inspections. Transition of continuing care facility audits from AHS to Alberta Health began in March 2022. A coordinated monitoring approach has reduced duplications of both reviews and site visits. In 2022-23, over 1,100 inspections were completed on accommodation and care in continuing care facilities across the province. Alberta Health also followed up on over 940 reportable incidents of resident safety or care concerns and conducted 103 complaint investigations. These activities continue to provide assurance that residents and clients are receiving safe and quality care and services. Budget	2022 allocated $204 million in capital grant funding over three years to expand capacity for continuing care. The inaugural Indigenous Stream was launched in 2021 to support continuing care facilities on and off reserves/settlements. As of June 2022, seven projects were approved for $67 million to develop 147 continuing care spaces. The inaugural Modernization Stream was launched on September 20, 2022, and concluded on January 6, 2023. This stream focused on refurbishing and/or replacing existing aging continuing care infrastructure at non-AHS owned facilities.  The Government of Alberta continues to prioritize quality PEOLC by investing $20 million in over 30 projects since 2019. Progress to date on projects commenced in 2020 include: • Covenant Health continued to work to increase general awareness of PEOLC, increase uptake of advance care planning and develop standardized, competency-based education to support the provision of high-quality PEOLC. • In October 2022, Covenant Health’s Palliative Institute launched the Compassionate Alberta website, (compassionatealberta.ca) which is a resource aimed at increasing awareness around palliative care and to help Albertans have open and honest conversations about death.  • Between April 2022 and March 2023, the Alberta Hospice Palliative Care Association successfully launched two programs that addresses the needs of caregivers and those with a life-limiting illness (the Living Every Season Program) as well as grief and bereavement needs for Albertans (the You’re Not Alone Grief Connection Program).  In November 2021, Alberta Health released the PEOLC call for grant proposals. The grant program focused on projects that address the four PEOLC priority areas identified in the	Advancing	Palliative	and	End‐of‐Life	Care	in	Alberta	Report. As a result of this grant call, a total of 25 new PEOLC grants were initiated in April 2022, totaling $11.3 million. The funding and project breakdown is as follows: • Nearly $4.2 million for eight projects to expand community supports and services. • More than $4.1 million for 10 projects to improve health-care provider and caregiver education and training. • More than $1.9 million to support four projects that advance earlier access to palliative and end-of-life care. • More than $1.1 million for three projects for research and innovation. In June 2022, the Pilgrims Hospice Society completed a one-year, grant-funded project that supported care navigation services, which provided Albertans with information on residential support programming and provided staff training on hospice care. Pilgrims Hospice Society also received $2.5 million in October 2022 to support residential hospice care at the Roozen Family Hospice Centre in Edmonton. This demonstration project will provide important information on the standalone hospice model used at the centre, including usage data and service quality, to identify longer-term options for funding and expanding residential hospice services in Alberta.
Government continued to invest in supporting the nearly one million Albertans who are caregivers for family and friends. This included approximately $2 million in grant funding since 2022 to Caregivers Alberta to enhance their programs and services; to Norquest College for the Skills Training for caregivers with a focus on rural areas; to the University of Alberta to reduce caregiver distress and support family and friend caregivers to maintain their health and well-being; and, to the Alzheimer Society of Alberta and the Northwest Territories to focus on delivering communitybased programming for persons living with dementia and their caregivers.  In 2022-23, the Government of Alberta continued to support innovations in dementia care through the Community-based Innovations for Dementia Care initiative, which supported 15 communitylevel projects, and through multiple projects delivered by the Alzheimer Society of Alberta and the Northwest Territories: • The Alberta Employers Dementia Awareness Project identified the needs of employers to develop best practices to create inclusive workplaces. This included piloting and launch of the Dementia Alberta website (https://www.dementiaalberta.ca) to ensure dementia in the workplace awareness materials are available to Alberta employers. The project also helps to ensure that employers have access to materials describing the importance of brain health and dementia risk reductions, and that employers have access to sample guidance, facts, tips and scenarios applicable to Alberta employers and employees. • The expansion of the First Link® early intervention program by enhancing outreach to and in rural communities. During the project, 113 rural communities received outreach and 91 small cities, specialized municipalities, municipal districts, towns, villages or summer villages received outreach services.  • The Community Dementia Ambassador Project, which created a program delivered by volunteers (Ambassadors) who live in or are familiar with the cultural and social values of Alberta communities. This project identified 22 Ambassadors from 16 communities, including Cardston, St. Paul and Peace River. Ambassadors reached more than 1,325 Albertans. To support the continuing care sector and its staffing needs, the government is exploring ways to increase the number of students enrolled in Health Care Aide (HCA) programs at various postsecondary institutions. Government is funding an additional 1,090 seats in HCA programs over three years, and invested $12.8 million to provide bursaries for HCA students to assist with education costs and encourage them to become HCAs. The HCA bursary program, administered by NorQuest College, went live July 1, 2022, and included three streams of funding: the Financial Incentive program, the HCA Tuition Bursary program, and the Workplace Tutor program.  Under the Financial Incentive program, students who were enrolled in a licensed HCA program between January 1 and June 30, 2022, are eligible for up to $4,000 if they agree to work a minimum of 1,000 hours with an identified continuing care operator within one year of starting employment. Eligible HCA students may receive up to $9,000 through the HCA Tuition Bursary program. The Workplace Tutor program provides funding for identified continuing care operators to educate and train HCAs at their workplace. Demand for the bursaries is steady with over 600 students applying for the regular bursary and approximately 350 HCA students approved to receive the bursary. These bursaries will remove barriers for students, and pay for schooling and other expenses while they are completing their program. From July 2022 to March 31, 2023, government provided $20.6 million to continuing care operators to partially offset inflationary increases to accommodation charges for continuing care residents. This support made accommodation charges more affordable for residents and shielded them from the full cost of living pressures associated with higher-than-average inflation.
The government provided $1 million to improve access to non-medical supports in the community. This included initiatives with United Way Calgary and the Edmonton Seniors Coordinating Council to provide more community supports and navigation assistance for clients seeking this help, expanding caregiver supports. In 2022-23, the percentage of medical patients with an unplanned hospital readmission within 30 days of discharge from hospital was 12.8 per cent. This was one per cent lower compared to last year (2021-22). A lower percentage means fewer patients have been readmitted to hospital within one month of discharge. A high rate of readmissions increases costs and may mean the health system is not performing as well as it could be. Although readmission may involve many factors, lower readmission rates show that Albertans are supported by discharge planning and continuity of services after discharge. Rates may also be impacted by the nature of the population served by a hospital facility, such as elderly patients or patients with complex health needs, or by the accessibility of post-discharge health care services in the community. Coordination of care is also improving with increased access to virtual care services and supports as well as recent enhancements to health information systems that enable electronic notification of primary care doctors when their patient is admitted or discharged from hospital. 1.3 Use	digital	technology	to	enable	new	models	of	care	and	reduce	manual	and	paperbased	processes.	Government continues to enhance the digital health environment to provide Albertans with digital access to their health information and give health care providers more complete digital patient information at the point of care to enhance quality of care for Albertans. Collecting health system data helps support evidence-informed decisions to address changing circumstances and to keep Albertans informed.  The digital modernization of the health care system involves several key elements. The MyHealth Records (MHR) portal allows Albertans to access their health information. In 2022-23, over         $7.9 million was spent on MHR. Alberta Netcare, the province's Electronic Health Record, is available to health care professionals in the community and AHS. In addition, Connect Care, an integrated system with Alberta Netcare, serves as a common platform for clinical information and stores all medical records, prescriptions, and care history collected from AHS facilities, including doctor's notes.  Giving Albertans digital access to their health information via the MHR portal reduces the need for them to manually request that information separately from each health provider. Albertans registered on MHR has grown from 1.25 million users in March of 2022 to just under 1.5 million users at the end of March 2023. MHR portal capabilities have been expanded with the addition of immediate release diagnostic imaging reports including CT and MRI scans. The Apple MHR App is now integrated with Apple Health Kit, allowing Albertans to connect health information from their Apple Health App account to MHR. These information technology components facilitate the shift from paper-based processes to digital processes and support the expansion of virtual care options. In 2022-23, new services to support electronic referral as part of the ASI were planned and developed. A data feed is being tested, paving the way for future referral notifications in MHR and in the Electronic Medical Records (EMR) systems of referring providers. Other improvements also included continuity of care services: • Patient data from the Central Patient Attachment Registry is now integrated with Alberta Netcare, enabling health care providers across Alberta to access information on the patient’s medical home, and who their primary provider is.
Design work on Alberta’s version of the International Patient Summary is nearing completion and development work will begin shortly with EMR vendors. A patient summary is a collection of clinical and contextual information about a patient’s health details. The Alberta version of the national standard is being coordinated with Ontario and Canada Health Infoway (a not-for profit funded by the Government of Canada) and includes necessary minimum amount of information to inform patient treatment at point of care. Alberta is hoping to have at least one EMR vendor conformed to Alberta’s Patient Summary in 2023, with additional vendors onboarded in 2024. • The Community Information Integration (CII) project improves Albertans’ access to primary care and community health information by collecting patient data from physician offices and other community-based clinics and making it available to other health care providers through Alberta Netcare. Over $6.5 million was spent on CII in 2022-23. In January 2023, there were 1,764 providers live on CII, taken from 430 clinics across 40 PCNs, and nearly 1.2 million Albertans in the Central Patient Attachment Registry database. More than seven million patient encounters and over 500,000 consult reports have been submitted to Netcare as of March 31, 2023. As the province emerges from the pandemic, the expectations of Albertans have shifted and there is a greater reliance on accessing on-demand virtual government services. In alignment with the Government of Alberta Digital Strategy and Alberta Health’s eHealth Strategy, developed in 202122, Alberta Health will modernize digital service delivery, increase productivity, save tax dollars, and improve user experience by better integrating technologies into the delivery of government services.  In 2022-23, $5.7 million was spent through the Health Canada Bilateral Agreement for PanCanadian Virtual Care to address secure messaging, secure video-conferencing technology, remote patient monitoring technologies, patient access to COVID-19 and other lab results, and back-end supports for integration of new platforms. This investment supported Alberta Health’s ongoing initiatives foundational to expanding the virtual health care system. Alberta Health has identified four strategic priorities for virtual care delivery in the province, which are reflected in Alberta’s Virtual Care Action Plan: • establishment of an eHealth Strategy that includes a strategy for virtual care; • expansion of the MyHealth Records patient portal capabilities, including expansion of lab results and addition of diagnostic imaging results; • development of secure messaging services for Alberta, including advanced services for twoway integration between community EMRs and Alberta Netcare; and, • development of a privacy and security framework for virtual care. Access to the MHR portal is free at https://myhealth.alberta.ca/myhealthrecords. Currently, Albertans can view parts of their Netcare record, including their medications dispensed through community pharmacies, lab results and immunization history through MHR. In 2022-23, discussions and approval processes for MHR and Alberta Netcare were underway for implementation. This enables Albertans to be active participants in their own health management. The ministry continues to make progress on a phased roll out of Connect Care within all AHS facilities to support digital modernization of the health system. In 2022-23, five of the nine planned launches for this multi-year project had been completed. Connect Care provides a single source of information in AHS to support team-based, integrated care with a focus on the patient and the efficient and effective provision of services. In 2022-23, over $260 million was spent on Connect Care. The total cost of Connect Care when completed is expected to be $1.45 billion. Although progress was slowed by the pandemic, work continues on the remaining four launches of deployment. All launches are expected to be completed by fall 2024 and approximately 145,400 users are expected with full roll out of the program.  The application of modern technologies will support the delivery of innovative care models that empower patients, families and their health care teams to improve quality of care. In 2022-23, eight digital health projects were funded at the Universities of Alberta and Calgary for a total investment of $9.6 million from AHS and Alberta Innovates. These academic-clinical collaborations will help AHS identify and advance solutions that improve health care quality, health outcomes, and overall value for Albertans. Projects include the integration of prevention into Connect Care to improve the health of Albertans; digital tools such as clinical decision support and remote monitoring for people with kidney issues to reduce acute care use; tele monitoring to reduce adverse events for hospitalized patients; and, an integrated digital health approach to diabetes with First Nations in Alberta. Digital technology is also being leveraged to modernize critical capabilities to administer the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) and support core business, such as claims processing and payment to health care providers. To better meet the needs of Albertans and care providers, work continued on future models of care and emerging digital technology to replace and redesign mainframe systems to increase functionality and reduce maintenance costs. In 2022-23, over  $6.5 million was spent on this initiative and the work towards the replacement and redesign of nine applications used to administer the AHCIP is ongoing.  1.4 Ensure	processes	for	resolving	patient	concerns	are	effective,	streamlined,	and	consistent	across	the	province.		It is important that Albertans are aware of what resources are available to help them resolve patient concerns, and how their valuable feedback can help improve the quality and safety of health services. The Office of the Alberta Health Advocates empowers Albertans to advocate for their health needs; resolves their concerns and refers individuals to programs and services to address their complaints; educates Albertans about the province’s Health Charter; and, provides health selfadvocacy skills and health literacy education to promote early resolution of issues and remove barriers and gaps in care. In February 2023, government appointed a new Health and Mental Health Advocate to be a strong voice for Albertans when it comes to their health care and to ensure the health system operates effectively for all Albertans.  From April 1, 2022, to March 31, 2023, there were 2,589 Albertans served by the Office of the Alberta Health Advocates. More specifically, there were 1,565 under the Health Advocate’s jurisdiction, 742 under the Mental Health Advocate’s jurisdiction, and 175 files that were under both jurisdictions. The Office of the Alberta Health Advocates hears the patient perspective on care experiences and provides feedback to entities in the health system through effective partnership and collaboration to encourage system improvement/change and effective legislative development. The ministry is committed to ensuring the patient complaints process is fair, responsive, and accessible and has processes in place to review and respond to feedback from patients and families. Recommendations to improve the current processes for resolving patient concerns and complaints have been developed, informed by consultation and research led by the Health Quality Council of Alberta. These recommendations were approved by government in the summer of 2022; Alberta Health is working on their implementation which is to expand the role and mandate of the Health Advocate; centralize intake, triage, navigation and standardize follow up with Albertans for all patient complaints; and, require mandatory information exchange between stakeholders to support improved public reporting for health care complaints. Once the recommendations are fully implemented, Albertans will have a simplified process to raise concerns and complaints about health care, and the Health Advocate will help them find the appropriate body to review and investigate the complaints. The Health Advocate will help improve accountability by monitoring the status of the resolution processes for completion and closure. Concerns and complaints will continue to be reviewed and investigated by AHS, health professions and other bodies created under statute to hear concerns.  Alberta Health continues working with First Nations and Métis health leaders to better understand their experiences with the current complaints management systems in Alberta, involve them in identifying ways to build Indigenous patient trust in the health care they receive, and to ensure their concerns are addressed appropriately. The outcome of this work will improve the current complaints management system by removing existing red tape and making the system easier to navigate for patients and families.
Outcome Two: A modernized, safe, person-centred, high quality and resilient health system that provides the most effective care now and in the future for each tax dollar spent  Key	Objectives	2.1	Continue	to	implement	strategies	to	bring	Alberta’s	health	spending	and	health	outcomes	more	in	line	with	comparator	provinces	and	national	norms,	including	implementation	of	AHS	review	recommendations	and	working	with	the	Alberta	Medical	Association	to	reach	a	fiscally	sustainable	agreement.		Albertans want and deserve a health care system that meets their needs, while also understanding the system needs to be sustainable. Government’s focus on ensuring value for money spent on health care supports this vision through actions and initiatives that make the most of taxpayer dollars. Budget 2022 invested $22.5 billion in Health’s operating budget to keep Albertans safe and healthy.  In 2022-23, Alberta received $5.8 billion in Government of Canada transfers, of which $5.5 billion was the Canada Health Transfer (CHT). The CHT included a $232 million one-time funding to address surgery backlog resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In February 2023, Alberta reached an agreement with the Government of Canada to invest more than $24 billion in Alberta's health care system over the next 10 years through the CHT. This funding aims to respond to the immediate needs of Albertans under the Health Care Action Plan, as well as improve access to family health services, including in rural and remote areas and in underserved communities; foster a resilient and supported health workforce; improve mental health care and addictions services; and, allow Albertans access to their own electronic health information. The ministry continues to closely monitor provincial per capita spending on health care to quantify progress on government’s broader commitment to get the most value for each dollar and improve access, and make the health system work better for Albertans, while managing cost growth in health care. The Government of Alberta continues to collaborate with health system partners to manage the biggest cost drivers in the health system – namely hospital services, labour and physician compensation, and publicly funded drug benefit programs. In 2022-23, the Government of Alberta spent $4.3 billion on hospital services (i.e., acute care), $6.0 billion on physician compensation and development, and $2.5 billion on drugs and supplemental health benefits.  The pandemic caused per capita health care spending for all provinces to increase significantly. The national average increased from $4,835 in 2019-20 to $5,628 in 2021-22. The Alberta provincial per capita spending on health care in 2021-22 is estimated to be $5,384, on par with the Canadian average. Improving efficiency and ensuring more value for tax dollars will improve health outcomes and support fiscal sustainability of the health system. The Alberta Health Services (AHS) Performance Review identified opportunities for AHS to reduce costs and improve health outcomes by using resources more efficiently. The ministry will continue to pursue opportunities to align spending with British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec by implementing efficiencies and reducing drug costs through the work of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance.
AHS continues to find ways to improve the health system and access to services to Albertans. Actions implemented as a result of the 2019 AHS Performance Review have had substantial impacts on the health care system and savings have been used to improve front-line care and system sustainability (https://open.alberta.ca/publications/alberta-health-services-performance-reviewsummary-report). Implementation of the AHS Review initiatives was concurrent with a global pandemic, labour negotiations and development of a new agreement between the government and the Alberta Medical Association (AMA). Operating expenditures (excluding COVID-19 costs) increased by 6.1 per cent in 2022-23 when compared to 2021-22. Alberta’s population growth and aging population has resulted in increased demand for healthcare services. The overall increase also reflected implementation of the new agreement with the AMA and recent settlements with various health labour unions. Despite these cost pressures, health spending growth is lower than the combined population growth and inflation increase. 
Protecting and improving the quality of health care in Alberta also requires capital investments. In 2022-23, a total of $841 million was invested in health-related capital projects across the province, including technology and information systems maintenance and renewal of existing facilities. Alberta continues to expand and modernize hospitals and other facilities to protect quality health care and grow system capacity. Investments in health system infrastructure is fundamental to improving efficiency in the health care system, reducing wait-times, providing additional surgical capacity, and to generally improve patient outcomes. Budget	2022 invested $193 million over three years for the redevelopment and expansion of the Red Deer Regional Hospital Centre to increase critical services and add capacity to one of the busiest hospitals in the province. The Red Deer Regional Hospital Centre redevelopment project functional program was completed in late April. The functional program develops and validates the scope of services and projected workload, staffing, and space to meet current and emerging acute health care needs of all residents of the Red Deer Regional Hospital’s catchment area. The functional program also addresses capacity and quality of space to improve patient and staff safety, support quality of care, manage utilization efficiently and sustainably, and ensure timely access to care. When completed this project will expand inpatient capacity from 370 beds to 570 beds and add three surgical suites, plus space to add three more suites when required in the future. There will be a new cardiac catheterization laboratory, a new medical device reprocessing space, expanded ambulatory care capacity, and expansion of many other clinical programs throughout the hospital. In 2022-23, over $133 million was allocated over three years for Alberta Surgical Initiative capital projects at AHS-owned facilities. This includes the renovation of the Medicine Hat Regional Hospital, the Edson Health Centre, and the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Edmonton. Construction also progressed on the University of Alberta Hospital in Edmonton, which will include a postanesthetic recovery unit and medical device reprocessing area when completed, and the Rocky Mountain House Health Centre, which is undergoing renovations for a new procedure room and the development of a new medical device reprocessing area. Design was completed for redevelopment at the Chinook Regional Hospital that will modernize and increase surgical procedure capacity. Other work also included designing 11 operating suites at the Calgary Foothills Medical Centre. As part of Budget	2022, $2.2 billion was allocated over three years to move forward with a number of capital projects, for example:  • The University of Alberta Hospital Brain Centre received $50 million over three years for a Neurosciences Intensive Care Unit. The design development report is nearing completion. • Provincial Pharmacy Central Drug Production and Distribution Centre ($49 million over three years). The design development report is complete. • The Norwood Tower at the Gene Zwozdesky Centre ($142 million over two years) received an occupancy permit in March 2023 and was turned over to AHS for operational commissioning.   In 2022-23, $116 million was spent to complete the Calgary Cancer Centre. The Calgary Cancer Centre Construction is complete and AHS is preparing the hospital to open in 2024. The hospital will have 160 new inpatient cancer beds, 100 patient exam rooms, 100 chemotherapy chairs, increased space for clinical trials, 12 radiation vaults, outpatient cancer clinics, and designated areas for clinical and operational support services and research laboratories. The completed project will increase cancer care capacity in Calgary by consolidating and expanding existing services to support integrated and comprehensive cancer care.  
On October 6, 2022, the government executed a four-year agreement with the AMA to address common interests such as quality of care, health care system sustainability, and stability of physician practices. Implementation of the AMA Agreement is underway and includes over $250 million in new spending over four years on initiatives targeted at communities and physician specialties facing recruitment and retention issues. The agreement included concrete solutions and the financial resources to support Albertans’ health care needs by promoting system stability through competitive compensation and providing targeted funding to address pressures that require immediate and longer-term stabilization. The agreement also allows physicians to provide greater input into longer-term approaches on improving patient care and physician compensation reform initiatives. Physicians received a one per cent lump sum COVID-19 recognition payment in 2022-23. Alberta physicians were at the forefront of the pandemic and the one-time payment for eligible practicing physicians is in recognition of that work during the 2021-22 fiscal year. The lump sum payment is approximately $45 million and was provided to the AMA in December 2022 to distribute to their members. Physicians will receive an average one per cent rate increase to compensation for each of the next three years. As part of implementation of the AMA Agreement, the Business Costs Program premium rate was increased by about 22 per cent. This increase will help physicians deal with inflation and keep practices open. The increase is estimated to cost $20 million annually, providing on average an extra $2,300 annually for each physician. This is in addition to about $80 million the government currently invests in the program each year. Following the ratification of the AMA Agreement, a commitment for collaboration between Alberta Health and the AMA regarding primary health care, including one-time investments of $20 million in Primary Care Networks (PCNs) for two fiscal years, was established. The Provincial PCN Committee provided significant contributions to the work of the Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS) initiative to improve access and quality of primary and community health services. The MAPS initiative goal is to provide recommendations on ways to strengthen primary health care and achieve a primary health care-oriented health system. MAPS is engaging leaders and experts with hands-on experience in primary health care and health systems improvement to examine the current landscape and propose improvements. By March 31, 2023, a final report was delivered proposing a strategic direction for primary health care over the next 10 years, with a parallel report providing strategic directions to improve the delivery of primary health care for Indigenous peoples in Alberta.  The $20 million investment in primary health care provides significant relief across the primary health care system, particularly for PCNs that have experienced a decline in their per capita payments from declining numbers of patients. This funding provides stabilization while work is undertaken to review and improve the overall funding model for PCNs, which will consider recommendations from the MAPS initiative.  For many Albertans, prescription drugs have tremendous benefits in terms of improving quality of life, managing illnesses, and in some cases, precluding the need for more extensive treatments. Alberta continued to work with the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to reduce prescription drug costs and increase access to clinically effective and cost-effective drug treatment options, including cell and gene therapy. All new drugs and/or new indications for use undergo price negotiations between the pCPA and drug manufacturers. In 2022-23, rebates have increased to an estimated $327 million from $275 million in 2021-22. This is a successful trend that shows the importance of the pCPA and Alberta’s involvement as a member to push health jurisdictions for more value and budgetary protection.  In 2022-23, the province spent $2.5 billion on drugs and supplemental health benefits and continued to improve existing drug benefit programs and add innovative and effective therapies through the addition of 320 new products in 2022-23. Of the 320 products added, 48 were brand name drug products and 272 were generic products.  Alberta’s Biosimilars Initiative will expand the use of biosimilars by replacing the use of biologic drugs with their biosimilar versions whenever possible. This means patients will continue receiving safe and effective treatment, but at a lower cost. In 2022-23, savings from this initiative increased to an estimated $65.7 million from $48.9 million in 2021-22.  2.2	Increase	regulations	and	oversight	to	improve	safety,	while	reducing	red	tape	within	the	health	system	by	restructuring	and	modernizing	health	legislation,	streamlining	processes,	and	reducing	duplication.	As of March 31, 2023, the ministry, including AHS, achieved a 36.1 per cent reduction of its regulatory and administrative requirements, exceeding the government target of 33 per cent. AHS will continue to see reductions with the ongoing launches of Connect Care across the organization, continuing through 2024.  Connect Care supports digital modernization of more complete central access to patient information related to AHS services. It provides resources, including medication alerts; evidencebased order sets; test and treatment suggestions; and, care paths and best practice advisories, which result in fewer repeated tests and consistent information across the province wherever care is being provided at AHS facilities. This system also reduces the number of forms used by AHS and helps to eliminate data entry duplication. Connect Care also facilitates direct communication between patients and providers through a patient portal, MyAHS Connect, which helps patients better manage their health with online access to their health information, including reports and test results. It also allows for online interaction with their care team, an ability to review and manage appointments and after visit care summaries, and less repeating of their health histories or need to remember complex histories or medication lists. The ministry continues to monitor Alberta’s health system to ensure standards are maintained and to improve safety and quality of health care. As of March 31, 2023, amendments to the Health	Professions	Act have been proclaimed into force that modernize Alberta’s professional regulatory structure. This included changes to 29 regulatory college regulations and one regulation that enhance professional regulation by health profession regulatory bodies and will make it easier for regulatory colleges to be more agile and adapt faster to changing best practices.   The PCN Nurse Practitioner (NP) Support Program was created to enable NPs to work to the full scope of their skills. In 2022-23, $7.6 million was provided and the program facilitated the incorporation of NPs working more than 57 full-time equivalent positions as of March 2023. The program increases access to primary health care, including after hours, weekends, and in rural and remote areas and underserved populations; supports chronic disease management; and, helps meet unmet demand for primary health care services. Challenges for the program include NP compensation, recruitment and retention, and the desire of NPs for an independent practice model.
Alberta Health is currently consulting with key stakeholders on a draft NP Compensation Model to address the challenges of the program.  Amendments to the Pharmacy	and	Drug	Act and the Pharmacy and Drug Regulation came into effect June 1, 2022. These amendments allow the Alberta College of Pharmacy and pharmacies to better respond to changes in the provision of pharmacy services to Albertans and reduce significant government red tape faced by pharmacy operators.  To address the current challenges in continuing care legislation and help to initiate transformative change within continuing care, Alberta Health worked with partners to develop a new legislative framework for the continuing care system to increase clarity regarding services, address gaps and inconsistencies across settings, enable improved service delivery for Albertans, and support health system accountability and sustainability. On May 31, 2022, the Continuing	Care	Act (Act) received Royal Assent. The Act will come into force on April 1, 2024, after the development and approval of regulations and standards. The ministry is currently working with partners on the development of those regulations and standards. When proclaimed, the Act will regulate the full spectrum of continuing care services and settings in Alberta, including continuing care homes, supportive living accommodations, and home and community care. Consequential amendments to the Act are included in The	Red	Tape	Reduction	Statutes	Amendment	Act, 2023. These amendments ensure alignment of terminology in existing legislation with the Act while maintaining the policies and intent of the current legislation. In May 2022, the Food Regulation under the	Public	Health	Act was amended to eliminate the requirement for food establishments to request an approval from a public health inspector to allow dogs into outdoor eating areas. The amendment reduced red tape for operators and provided them greater flexibility in meeting the needs of their customers. The Food Regulation provides clear requirements to support the change so dogs can stay with their owners on outdoor patios, while maintaining a high degree of food safety.  2.3	Improve	measuring,	monitoring	and	reporting	of	health	system	performance	to	drive	health	care	improvements.	Measuring performance is the clearest way to show investments in the health care system are leading to better outcomes for Albertans. Alberta Health worked with the Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) to ensure alignment of their plans and priorities with government key priorities and achieve improvements through various initiatives. On July 26, 2022, Alberta Health executed a $23 million operating grant agreement with the HQCA over three years (April 1, 2022 to March 31, 2025) to keep the organization working with patients, families, and partners from across health care and academia to inspire improvement in patient safety, person-centred care, and health service quality. As an example, Alberta Health worked with the HQCA to develop a Primary Care Patient Experience survey to engage Albertans on their experiences within the health care system.  Work continued towards transitioning manual surveys to a digital, computer-adaptive testing methodologies format to use digital technology to enable new models of care and reduce manual and paper-based processes. Digital formats for surveys and reports across primary and continuing care increased Albertans’ engagement within the health system and allowed more timely feedback to service providers about care concerns, including patients’ opinions.  
Alberta Health worked with HQCA to create primary health care panel reports to support planning, quality improvement, health system management for overall purpose of improving primary health care delivery. The panel reports provide family physicians with information on their patients’ continuity, as well as valuable data on screening and vaccination rates, chronic conditions, pharmaceutical use, and emergency and hospital visits. Alberta Health worked with AHS and the HQCA to develop a value-based assessment tool for objectively assessing value from the Government of Alberta annual investment into health outcomes of Albertans and benchmark against other jurisdictions, particularly the comparator provinces of British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec.    Alberta Health also worked with the HQCA to complete priority work on identifying emergency medical services key performance indicators. Performance measures were developed and are under ministry review, with a shift in focus to reducing response times measured at the 90th percentile, rather than the 50th percentile. Releasing the results and performance information improves quality and patient safety and assures Albertans of the government’s commitment to increase accountability and transparency in Alberta’s health care system. The adoption of best practices and monitoring of performance measures help to improve health outcomes.  Work continued with the HQCA on developing the Patient Experience Awards and Quality Exchange to support excellence in care and sharing of best practices. This included continuing to develop resources and information to support and inform program planning, panel management, quality improvement and policy development in primary health care, as well as patient experience information for designated supportive living and continuing care. Information is published for Albertans in FOCUS, a dynamic online reporting tool which collects information about what patients experience in the provincial health care system, including: emergency departments, primary health care, long-term care, designated supportive living and home care.
Outcome Three: The health and well-being of all Albertans is protected, supported and improved, and health inequities among population groups are reduced Key	Objectives	3.1	Ensure	a	continued,	effective	response	to	the	COVID‐19	pandemic	by	optimizing	access	to	treatments	and	vaccine,	and	reducing	vaccine	hesitancy.	The Government of Alberta remains committed to supporting Albertans as we shift to managing COVID-19 similar to how other endemic respiratory viruses are managed. Alberta’s capacity to treat and clinically manage cases of COVID-19 continues to improve. Immunization, including receiving a booster dose of COVID-19 vaccine, is one of the best choices Albertans can make to protect themselves from severe illness due to COVID-19 infection. In 2022-23, $1.2 billion was spent on COVID-19 response to ensure the health care system had the resources required to address health care pressures resulting from the pandemic. By the end of June 2022, all mandatory public health measures related to COVID-19 were lifted. This was due to increased immunization coverage, attenuation of severity of new circulating variants, and the ability to treat and clinically manage cases of COVID-19. This signaled the beginning of a shift in Alberta’s handling of COVID-19 from an emergency pandemic response to an endemic state. Government supported this transition by working across multiple facets of health care (e.g., primary care, continuing care, workplace health and safety, public health, provincial laboratory, etc.) to align public health recommendations, such as testing and isolation, across all common respiratory viral illnesses.  The ministry continued to monitor the impacts and transmission of COVID-19 and other respiratory viruses in the community by working with partners on the implementation of ongoing and new COVID-19 immunization programs, including the introduction of bivalent booster vaccines, and implementing treatment protocols for COVID-19. Alberta Health and the Health Quality Council of Alberta established a COVID-19 Data Task Force, comprised of health professionals, to conduct a data review of the last several years of health information with a view to offering recommendations to the Government of Alberta on how to better manage a future pandemic. The purpose of the review is an opportunity to reflect on Alberta’s pandemic response from a data quality and validity lens to identify opportunities for improvements to manage future pandemics. To minimize the impact of COVID-19 and protect public health, COVID-19 Rapid Antigen Tests were made available across the province to all Albertans free of charge through participating community pharmacies. Initially, supply was limited and this distribution model enabled an equitable distribution of tests across the province. Between March 2021 to March 31, 2023, Alberta distributed 48.5 million rapid antigen tests to acute and continuing care sites, primary care clinics, businesses, K-12 schools, municipalities, First Nations and Métis communities, and the general public.  Government developed COVID-19 vaccine strategies to help reduce the spread, minimize severe outcomes and protect vulnerable Albertans. Work continued to support the review of ongoing evidence and recommendations for immunization against COVID-19, including guidance for immunization post-infection (or hybrid immunity), as well as for fall/spring booster programs. In 2022, Alberta continuously achieved key milestones on COVID-19 vaccine administration and roll out for different age groups and populations. In April 2022, 40 per cent of Albertans 12 and older had received their third vaccine dose. In June 2022, 35 per cent of Albertans aged five to 11 had received two doses of COVID-19 vaccine. On November 14, 2022, the Pfizer vaccine was made available for individuals six months to four years of age, and on March 20, 2023, a second bivalent vaccine (spring booster) was made available for residents living in senior congregate living settings.  In 2022-23, 1.4 million COVID-19 vaccine doses were administered to Albertans and 26 per cent of the population 12 years of age and older had received a booster dose. While the federal government continued to cover the costs of the vaccines, Alberta Health spent $53 million in 2022-23 to distribute the vaccines to Albertans. The Alberta Vaccine Booking System (AVBS), launched in summer of 2021, continues to provide Albertans with access to book both COVID-19 and influenza vaccine appointments at participating Alberta Health Services (AHS) or pharmacy locations by providing a centralized, province-wide online appointment booking platform. The centralization of all vaccine booking appointments, including from AHS, Public Health, and Community Pharmacy helps Alberta Health forecast vaccine demand and strategically distribute vaccine supply. Vaccine eligibility criteria and system functionality continue to be updated based on direction from provincial immunization programs. In 2022-23, more than 575,000 appointments for COVID-19 and influenza immunization were scheduled using the AVBS. Updates continue to be released to support dynamic vaccine eligibility changes and to continually improve the user experience. Previously, Albertans had to call multiple pharmacies and Health Link in an attempt to find available vaccine supply. The Health Link 811 call centre continues to support Albertans who do not or cannot use the AVBS.  To ensure a continued response to COVID-19, Alberta Health together with AHS extended the provision of free personal protective equipment (PPE) to primary care physicians, pediatricians, and their staff to support their operations and enhance safety to May 31, 2022. In 2022-23, inventory consumption expense associated with the COVID-19 response was $365 million; this includes PPE, testing supplies and $88.6 million for rapid test kits. In addition, the government worked with continuing care partners to protect residents of congregate care facilities and home care clients. A total of $286 million was provided in 2022-23 for additional staffing costs and cleaning supplies, PPE and screening of visitors to protect the health and safety of residents. In 2022-23, AHS, in collaboration with the Zone PCN Committees, worked towards the administration of an oral antiviral COVID-19 treatment in respective AHS geographical zones, enhancing capacity for testing and swabbing for respiratory illnesses. In 2021-22, intravenous Sotrovimab was made available on an outpatient basis to Albertans at higher risk of severe illness or death, followed by availability of Paxlovid, the first COVID-19 treatment approved by Health Canada that can be taken orally at home. Efforts were made to recruit sentinels (primary care physicians/nurse volunteers) to increase the effectiveness of the TARRANT Viral Watch Program, which monitors respiratory infections circulating in the community. 3.2	Safeguard	Albertans	from	communicable	diseases	that	can	cause	severe	illness,	permanent	disability,	or	death.	The ministry works to protect Albertans from a number of communicable diseases, such as influenza, measles, and sexually transmitted and blood borne infections. Over the past year, immunization programs for vaccine-preventable diseases continued to be a primary strategy in preventing disease, disease transmission and severe health outcomes. They are key to the health of a population and to decreasing the strain on the acute care system.  Through promoting initiatives that aim to increase childhood and adult immunization rates, Alberta continued to offer immunizations programs, including influenza vaccine, to Albertans six months of age and older, free of charge in collaboration with many partners. Alberta’s 2022-23 influenza season started earlier with a surge of influenza A cases in early October. The highest positivity for influenza A was 31.9 per cent in the week of November 20, 2022, and cases and outbreaks decreased significantly by the end of December 2022. Alberta had sufficient supply of influenza vaccines to immunize 38 per cent of the population. Alberta Health worked with AHS to ensure respiratory outbreak definitions and management guidelines were in place for high-risk settings, including continuing care and acute care facilities, to minimize severe health outcomes and protect the most vulnerable Albertans in these settings.  Despite the challenges of fatigued providers and a generally vaccine fatigued population, the overall influenza immunization rate is one per cent higher than in 2021-22. As of March 31, 2023, approximately 28 per cent of Albertans received an influenza vaccine. Budget 2022 included an increase of $14.3 million related to the approval of the high-dose influenza vaccine for Albertans 65 years of age or older. As of March 31, 2023, approximately 64 per cent of Albertans 65 years of age and older, and 75 per cent of Albertans 90 years of age and older received a high-dose influenza vaccine. The Alberta Outreach Program started the week of October 3, 2022, to immunize those at highest risk of severe outcomes from influenza. The 2022-23 Influenza Immunization Program for the general public began on October 17, 2022, and ended on March 31, 2023. Influenza vaccine was available at over 2,500 immunizing sites, including AHS clinics, Indigenous Services Canada clinics, community pharmacies, community medical clinics, and post-secondary institutions.  Immunization programs save millions of dollars, helping people of all ages live longer, healthier lives, and decreasing the burden on the health care system. The pandemic did result in some disruptions to the routine school immunization program and overall infant and preschool immunization rates have decreased. However, AHS has hired additional staff to support addressing the school immunization backlog and in-school catch-up programs, and immunization rates for school-aged children are nearing pre-pandemic coverage levels. In 2022, by age two, 71 per cent of Albertans had received immunization with diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Haemophilus influenzae type b (DTaP-IPV-Hib) vaccine and 82 per cent had received immunization with measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine. These immunization rates are both lower than the national target of 95 per cent for these vaccines. As a result of the COVID-19 response, childhood immunization rates dropped between 2021 and 2022. AHS has a catch-up program to increase childhood immunization rates to help reach the national target of 95 per cent. This includes actions such as reminder calls for booked appointments, monitoring wait times and adding appointments as needed, and following up using a recall process for children with delayed immunizations.  Work is underway with service providers to enhance testing, treatment and prevention strategies, including working with community-based organizations, to improve women’s health, reduce barriers to sexually transmitted and blood borne infections (STBBI) testing and treatment, and increase access to prenatal syphilis screening. Over $8 million annually is provided to organizations to prevent STBBIs and provide wrap-around supports for people living with those infections, including $1.2 million specifically for syphilis outbreak response.  In September 2022, Alberta experienced a shigella outbreak in Edmonton, which ended in February 2023 after two weeks without new cases. However, the outbreak was re-opened in March 2023, when seven additional cases were reported and some patients hospitalized. As of March 31, 2023, 214 cases were reported since the outbreak initially started; no deaths were reported. In October 2022, the Shigella Task Force brought together cross-sector partners, including representatives from Alberta Health, AHS, shelters, inner-city agencies, the City of Edmonton, local family physicians, and Alberta Precision Labs to coordinate resources and discuss options for limiting spread.  
Syphilis has made a drastic resurgence in Alberta since 2019, with rates being the highest in more than 70 years. Alberta Health has resumed a leadership role in the provincial syphilis response, after an interruption due to COVID-19, through work with frontline service providers to support testing, treatment, and prevention strategies. By increasing access to syphilis testing and treatment services in a variety of novel health settings, the Government of Alberta will help create awareness and normalize sexually transmitted infections testing and treatment for all Albertans. The ministry is also leading and supporting a number of provincial outbreak responses and preparedness activities including: • leading the human health response to highly pathogenic avian influenza, including supporting the update of public health disease management guidelines and communication pieces for government websites;  • supporting the coordinated provincial response to the international mpox (formally known as monkey pox) outbreak, including guidelines for contact management and guidance on pre and post-exposure vaccine use; and, • working with AHS public health in preparation for response to international communicable disease outbreaks, including Ebola and Polio.  In early May 2022, cases of mpox began to occur in countries where mpox was not previously detected. Canada’s first case was reported on May 19, 2022, and Alberta reported its first case on June 2, 2022. By July 2022, mpox was declared a public health emergency of international concern by the World Health Organization. Alberta Health worked in collaboration with public health partners to develop testing criteria, case definitions and public health management guidelines. The Alberta Mpox Public Health Notifiable Disease Guideline was published in June 2022. Alberta began offering post-exposure vaccine on June 7, 2022, and the targeted pre-exposure vaccine campaign began at the end of June. As of March 31, 2023, Alberta recorded 45 cases of mpox. Alberta has administered 2,183 first doses and 1,715 second doses of the vaccine.  3.3	Expand	access	to	a	range	of	in‐person	and	virtual	recovery‐oriented	addiction	and	mental	health	services.		Reporting responsibility for this objective has transferred to the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction. Performance	Measure	3.a Percentage	of	mental	health	and	addiction‐related	emergency	department	visits	with	no	mental	health	service	in	previous	two	years Reporting responsibility for this performance measure has transferred to the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction. 3.4	Prevent	injuries	and	chronic	diseases	and	conditions	through	health	and	wellness	promotion,	and	environmental	and	individual	initiatives.		In 2022-23, $646 million was expensed to support population and public health initiatives to maintain and improve the health of Albertans through services promoting and protecting health and preventing injury and disease.  
Government provides leadership and support to protect the health and safety of Albertans and improve their health and well-being by setting public policy in a number of areas, such as maternal, infant and early child development; injury prevention; public health matters related to cannabis use; tobacco and vaping control; and, promotion of population wellness and health equity.  Government recognizes that Albertans living with diabetes want to access health programs and services that will more effectively support their needs. On July 21, 2022, the Minister announced the establishment of the Diabetes Working Group (DWG) to review Alberta’s entire diabetes care pathway, identify gaps in care, and provide recommendations to improve diabetes prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and management. In addition, Alberta Health expanded the Insulin Pump Therapy Program to include newer pumps and supplies. Albertans enrolled in the pump program now have access to the newest technologies for management of diabetes. Improved access to the newer diabetes management technologies, and the work of the DWG will improve outcomes and quality of life for Albertans living with diabetes. Nearly $7 million was provided to AHS for cancer prevention initiatives supporting comprehensive projects that are reducing the risk of cancer across the province. These projects address healthy lifestyles, smoking cessation, workplace wellness, and partnerships with Indigenous communities. In 2022-23, the Cancer Prevention Screening and Innovation initiative worked with organizations such as Promoting Health, Chronic Disease Prevention and Oral Health, AHS Provincial Population and Public Health, the Alberta First Nations Information Governance Centre, the Métis Nation of Alberta, and the new AHS Indigenous Wellness Core to:   • adopt the Alberta Healthy Communities Approach to focus on scaling and spreading successful interventions provincewide; • create a working partnership with the Human Papilloma Virus community innovation for sub-populations and the Provincial Population and Public Health Screening Programs and Communicable Disease Control divisions; • improve the Healthier Together Workplace program and recognition strategy; and, • strengthen work with Indigenous communities to facilitate community action to reduce modifiable factors, raise cancer awareness and improve cancer screening. A community support model was created, and tools were adapted to support the three initial Metis Settlements to create, implement and evaluate cancer prevention action plans. Alberta Health currently funds several health promotion-based initiatives to improve individual and community health and well-being: • Alberta Health continues to support the Injury Prevention Centre to provide unintentional injury prevention programs, research, and education. Through the Injury Prevention Centre, Albertans have access to programs and education that reduce the risk of injury and make communities safer. Injury prevention is a public health priority that directly reduces costs to the health care system. Injury bears an estimated financial cost of $7.1 billion annually in Alberta, $4.6 billion of which is direct health care costs.  • Physician prescription to Get Active supports individuals to become more active through physical activity. Prescriptions can be filled at participating recreation facilities for free visits, free one month facility passes and/or free fitness classes.  • The Communities ChooseWell program advances healthy eating and active living by supporting communities to create local conditions and environments that enable Albertans to eat well and be active. The program provides resources, education and support to community groups as well as offering small grants for implementing local healthy eating and active living initiatives.  Alberta Health provides approximately $2 million in grants annually to five programs that support vulnerable mothers and their babies. From April 2022 to September 2022, programs provided intensive supports to 287 vulnerable women who were pregnant or of child-bearing age, and more vulnerable women were provided outreach supports to address gaps in support specific to the COVID-19 pandemic. Alberta Health and AHS also provided funding to support the University of Alberta’s ENRICH Maskwacîs Kokums and Mosoms Elders Mentoring Program, which creates enhanced support networks for parents-to-be. In addition, elder support helps address a gap in service within the prenatal clinical setting by connecting parents to traditional knowledge and culture. Budget	2021 provided a total of $6.75 million over three years, including $2.25 million in Budget 2022, to establish and operate the AHS Tobacco and Vaping Reduction Act Enforcement Team. As of March 31, 2023, over $2.4 million has been spent, and the team has conducted retail inspections, established a secret shopper program and a public complaint line, and created retailer resources (handbook and signage) that will improve compliance with the Act and regulation. The most current data (from the 2021-22 fiscal year) shows the enforcement team conducted 2,400 retail inspections and provided over 4,000 copies of the retailer handbook and signs to retailers. In 2022-23, Alberta Health established the Alberta Ukrainian Evacuees Health Benefit Program. The total cost of the program was $9.5 million, including physician services. As of March 31, 2023, 24,000 Ukrainians have applied for health coverage in Alberta. In addition, the ministry established a health benefit program that provided Ukrainian evacuees with access to supplemental coverage for prescription and non-prescription drugs, nutritional products, diabetic supplies, and dental, optical and emergency ambulance services. Work continues in partnership with the ministries of Agriculture and Irrigation and Environment and Protected Areas on a One Health approach to antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in the province. This work is critical to address the emerging threat of treatment-resistant microbes in human and animal populations and in the environment. An Antimicrobial Strategic Framework for Action and Implementation plan continues to be developed to help guide collective efforts to address the growing threat of AMR in Alberta. Stakeholders and partners were consulted and supported development of the framework. In 2022-23, the Office of One Health at the University of Calgary was contracted at a cost of $200,000 to support implementation of AMR priority areas for action. As part of the contract, an advisory group on stewardship was created to provide guidance on specific activities, measures, targets, and costs for implementation. Alberta Health worked with AHS, Alberta Environment and Protected Areas, and the Alberta Lake Management Society to quickly set up a water quality (fecal contamination and cyanobacterial blooms) monitoring program for four sites on Lac Ste. Anne to support the 2022 papal visit and annual Lac Ste. Anne pilgrimage. Data from this monitoring program provided the basis for issuance of a cyanobacterial bloom public health advisory for Lac Ste. Anne shortly before the event. Alberta Health regularly assesses the evidence on water fluoridation to help support municipal councils to make evidence-informed decisions regarding community water fluoridation. The ministry worked on updating community water fluoridation position statement with new relevant research, including new local data from Calgary. Alberta Health continues to provide transparent information about environmental public health data, while simultaneously providing risk communication materials to influence modifiable risk factors within the Alberta population. Examples of public health data and information available through the Open Government Portal include:  • Routine chemistry and trace element data from domestic well water samples analyzed in 2016–17 and 2017–18 are available. Alberta Health funded routine chemistry and trace elements analysis of 4,842 samples of drinking water from private water wells and  307 samples from small, public, non-municipal drinking water systems. As well, data related to the study of two stormwater ponds in Lacombe, Alberta were released to the open government portal at https://open.alberta.ca/opendata/lacombe-stormwater-ponddataset. This data includes the analysis of contaminants (e.g., mercury, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, trace metals, pesticides and volatile organic compounds) in fish, sediments, and water. • The Alberta Environmental Public Health Information Network, accessible at http://aephin.alberta.ca, supports awareness and provides opportunities for Albertans, academics, and cross-government partners to learn more about environmental hazards and public health in the province. In 2022-23, new visualizations were published for “Human Biomonitoring of Environmental Chemicals in Canada and the Prairies” and a “Search Interface for Environmental Site Assessment Repository”, along with enhancements including the incorporation of new, yearly data on the recreational water bodies and the impacts of poor air quality and heat. In addition, Alberta Health developed the Extreme Heat website and notification protocol at https://www.alberta.ca/extreme-heat.aspx. • Alberta Health continued to provide real-time information to Albertans about hazards and risks associated with recreational water quality at Alberta beaches and waterbodies. In 2022, over 2,300 samples were collected from 85 recreational sites to identify fecal contamination and 436 samples were collected from 50 lakes, reservoirs, and rivers to be assessed for cyanobacterial (blue green algal) blooms and microcystin toxin. This monitoring resulted in the issuing of 47 cyanobacterial bloom advisories and nine fecal contamination advisories to protect the health of Albertans and visitors to the province. Additionally, in May 2022, Alberta Health updated the Alberta Safe Beach Protocol available at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/9781460145395 to reflect new Health Canada Guidelines for cyanobacterial blooms in recreational water. In February 2023, Alberta Health released a position statement around use of stormwater ponds at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/stormwater-ponds-in-alberta-health-guidanceinformation-sheet. • Alberta Health, as part of the Scientific Working Group on Contaminated Sites in Alberta, has published a Site-Specific Risk Assessment guidance document to clarify the specific requirements of conducting a site-specific risk assessment in Alberta, available at: https://open.alberta.ca/publications/supplemental-guidance-on-site-specific-riskassessments-in-alberta. Alberta Health and the Alberta Centre for Toxicology at the University of Calgary have published the report and dataset of “Post-Horse River Wildfire Surface Water Quality Monitoring Using the Water Cytotoxicity Test” available at https://prism.ucalgary.ca/handle/1880/115412. 3.5	Improve	access	for	underserved	populations	and	for	First	Nations,	Métis,	and	Inuit	peoples	to	quality	health	services	that	support	improved	health	outcomes.			The most current result available from Statistics Canada’s Canadian Community Health Survey shows that in 2021, 87.3 per cent of Albertans had access to a regular health provider, an improvement from 85.3 per cent in 2020. Having a regular health care provider is important for early screening, prevention through health and wellness advice, diagnosis, and treatment of a health issue, as well as ensuring good continuity of care and connections to other health and social services. The desired result is to increase the percentage of Albertans who have access to a regular health care provider. Increasing access to a regular health care provider is consistent with progress towards the following provincial primary health care goals:  • timely access to appropriate primary care services delivered by a regular health care provider or team;  • coordinated, seamless delivery of primary care services through a patient’s ‘medical home’ and integration of primary care with other levels of the health care system;  • efficient delivery of high-quality, evidence-informed primary care services; and,  • involvement of Albertans as active partners in their own health and wellness.  Alberta’s Primary Care Networks are involved in a variety of initiatives that support provincial and health zone primary care goals, including adopting a ‘medical home’ approach in their practices. This approach strengthens the connection between a patient and regular health care provider to improve access to care, chronic disease prevention and management, continuity of care, and innovations in primary health care including telemedicine and virtual care. The Government of Alberta is committed to addressing the health needs of First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples residing in Alberta, including working with First Nations and Métis leaders, the Government of Canada and other partners to streamline how Indigenous peoples access health services, and ensuring that health services are more culturally appropriate. There is a significant gap in equitable access to primary health care for Indigenous peoples. This is evidenced by noting that in Alberta, Indigenous peoples’ life expectancy is 16.4 years below that of all other Albertans, falling below 64 years of age.  An Indigenous Primary Health Care Advisory Panel was established in the fall of 2022 under MAPS to provide advice to the Minister on how the existing primary health care system could be improved to ensure First Nation, Métis, and Inuit peoples have access to high-quality, culturally safe primary health care no matter where they live. As part of their work, the Indigenous Panel convened an Indigenous Youth Innovation Forum, Indigenous Primary Health Care Innovation Forum, and participated in the MAPS Forum and Community Care Innovation Forum. These forums, along with engagements with First Nations, the Metis Settlements General Council, the Métis Nation of Alberta, and others ensured that a broad range of perspectives informed the Indigenous Panel’s work. As part of their deliberations, the Indigenous Panel submitted recommendations to the Minister in December 2022 for early opportunities for investment in enhancing Indigenous primary health care. These recommendations were approved in principle by the Minister as a first step to improving access to more culturally safe and integrated care. In 2022-23, Alberta Health provided $8.8 million to the Indigenous Wellness Program Alternative Relationship Plan to support 24 full-time equivalent physician positions to provide care in over 20 Indigenous health care centres throughout Alberta, including the Alberta Indigenous Virtual Care Clinic. Alberta Health has a separate Alternative Relationship Plan arrangement with Siksika Nation, and provides up to $1.1 million to support three full-time equivalent physician positions to provide care in the community. Alberta Health continues to engage Indigenous health care experts through the First Nations Health Advisory Panel and a Metis Settlements Health Advisory Panel. Panel members include Health Directors from across the province, as well as other associated stakeholders. The Panels inform health priorities and strategies and assist in identifying issues or gaps in programs and services, as well as working to identify potential solutions and areas of future collaboration. Alberta Health also continued work on Alberta’s Protocol Agreement Health Sub-Tables to collaborate on addressing the health gaps identified by the members of the Blackfoot Confederacy and the Stoney Nakoda Tsuut’ina Tribal Council. Alberta Health similarly worked with the Métis Nation of Alberta under their Framework Agreement with the Government of Alberta. Alberta upholds the Jordan’s Principle commitments by working with the Government of Canada and the First Nations Health Consortium, an Alberta-wide organization developed to improve access to health, social, and education services and supports to First Nations and Inuit children throughout the province, living both on and off reserve. To ensure compliance, Alberta Health established an Executive Leadership Group (including the ministries of Children’s Services, Seniors, Community and Social Services, Alberta Education, Indigenous Relations, and Alberta Health) to implement Jordan’s Principle in Alberta and to ensure that First Nations children have access to health, social, and educational resources when required, without denial or delay related to jurisdictional dispute over payment.  Alberta Health has also established a Technical Cross-Jurisdictional Working Group to address barriers impacting access to programs and services. The working group includes the First Nations Health Consortium, the First Nations Inuit Health Branch, and the Ministries of Children Services, Seniors, Community and Social Services, Education, and Indigenous Relations. On October 24, 2022, government appointed a Parliamentary Secretary for Rural Health, to work with Alberta Health to address rural health challenges, such as access and health care professionals. Budget 2022 introduced a new Rural Capacity Investment Fund, as part of the provincial agreement that impacted more than 30,000 registered nurses and registered psychiatric nurses across the province. The fund supports recruitment and retention strategies in rural and remote areas of the province, including relocation assistance. Almost $4.4 million was spent in 2022-23 to assist nearly 200 employees who chose to relocate to rural Alberta and pay out retention payments to over 8,200 rural health professionals. The benefit to rural Albertans will be realized by improved staff retention rates and fewer vacancies. The Government of Alberta recognizes the importance of rural health facilities and that these health centres provide an essential role for local residents. AHS and Alberta Health have established Zone Health Care Plans based on a framework that guides the development of comprehensive, zone-wide strategic health service plans, including services for Indigenous peoples. These long-range plans address the needs of rural communities with a continued focus on appropriate quality of care, patient safety, and access to services. Conditional approval was provided to seven proponents under the Continuing Care Capital Program–Indigenous Stream in June 2022. The Modernization Stream was launched in September 2022.  In 2022-23, the Government of Alberta provided approximately $7 million to the Rural Health Professions Action Plan to attract and retain rural physicians with the appropriate skills to meet the needs of rural Albertans. The program supported physician locums to maintain services when rural physicians need time away from their practice; offered continuing medical education; provided accommodations for 785 rural learners for rural placements so that they can train and choose to practice in rural communities; and, created welcoming environments though 50 attraction and retention committees so that rural communities can attract and retain health professionals.  In 2022, the Government of Alberta announced the Rural Education Supplement and Integrated Doctor Experience (RESIDE) program, which allocated $8 million over three years to provide incentives to new family physicians who agree to practice in rural and remote communities in exchange for a multi-year service agreement. The program will help address challenges in patient access to health services in rural and remote areas. Since the start of the program, Alberta Health has approved several changes to the RESIDE program to better meet the needs of physicians and communities and help ensure the program successfully incentivizes more physicians to move to communities of need. As of March 31, 2023, seven physicians had signed return of service agreements in rural communities. The Provincial Primary Care Network Committee provided the Minister with a recommendations report on supporting recruitment and retention of primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants in rural communities. In May 2022, the Minister accepted the seven recommendations that address broader systemic aspects of rural health service challenges, and this report will inform further work within Alberta Health.	In July 2022, government announced new funding of $45 million over three years to increase access to pediatric rehabilitation services and programs such as speech-language, as well as occupational and physical therapy for children and youth. A community pediatric services model was developed by AHS to address gaps with implementation of enhanced pediatric rehabilitation supports, including universal and targeted resources and programs and expanded eligibility for specified services. Service delivery is enhanced with clear intake, access and triage to services and strengthened teams to support care. Pediatric rehabilitation professionals work with families and alongside other health care professionals to help children and youth live well, build resiliency and take part in activities meaningful to them and their families. A multi-pronged workforce recruitment, retention, and optimization approach is enabling implementation despite the ongoing challenges with recruitment of health professionals across programs and jurisdictions. Alberta Health Services Provincial Rural Palliative Care In-Home Funding Program provides special, funding that can be accessed by rural palliative clients and families when they require additional support beyond existing services at end-of-life to remain at home instead of being admitted to hospital. Between April 1, 2022 and March 31, 2023, a total of 143 clients were served by the program. Of the clients who have died while accessing the program, 80 per cent were able to pass away in the comfort of their own home.  