We all want the best, but sometimes, the top-tier choice exceeds our budget. Thankfully, cheap Bluetooth headphones are easy to come by, and with the rise of wireless earbuds, premium headset prices have fallen dramatically. Although all of our picks are relatively affordable, none of them are inherently cheap. Whether you need active noise canceling (ANC), a compact design, or long battery life, we’ve got something to scratch your audio itch.
 

 

 Editors note: This article was updated on June 28th, 2024, to add new top picks.
 

 For under $100, the JLab JBuds Lux are crazy good value
 The JLab JBuds Lux ANC sitting atop a wooden desk.
 The JBuds Lux is a compelling buy under $80.
 The JLab JBuds Lux ANC punches well above its weight, offering exceptional value for under $100. These over-ear headphones feature active noise cancelation that does a decent job of hushing ambient noise, especially in the higher frequencies. While the ANC performance can’t match premium models, it’s impressive for the price.
 

 The sound quality is quite good, with an overall MDAQS score of 4.5/5, lauding the headphones’ faithful timbre and immersive soundstage. They have an elevated bass response and boosted treble that helps counter environmental noise during commutes.
 

 

 Other highlights include a 44-hour battery life, USB-C audio support, and a companion app with EQ and customization options. The JBuds Lux ANC may lack advanced features like head tracking, but they nail the fundamentals at a stellar price, making them one of the best budget ANC headphones you can buy.
 

 JLab JBuds Lux ANC
 SG recommended
 JLab JBuds Lux ANC
 USB-C audio • Sound quality • Comfort
 MSRP: $79.99
 For under $100, these are crazy good value.
 As far as inexpensive ANC headphones go, the JLab JBuds Lux ANC are one of the best of 2024. They focus on the fundamentals, and not fighting the spec wars.
 

 The Anker Soundcore Space One has style
 Anker Soundcore Space One headphones next to cloth case and cables.
 Along with the headphones, you get a cloth carrying case, USB-C charging cable, and 3.5mm auxiliary cable.
 The Anker Soundcore Space One is a solid choice for consumers seeking noise canceling headphones under $100. The headphones have good isolation and active noise cancelation (ANC), wear detection, long battery life, and the inclusion of Bluetooth 5.3 with LDAC support. The companion app further allows customizable sound profiles and ANC adjustments.
 

 

 The absence of touch controls and an audio profile that leans towards over-emphasized bass and treble may deter some users. Additionally, the lack of audio-over-USB functionality limits its versatility compared to some competitors. Despite these drawbacks, the overall value proposition remains strong, especially considering the headphones’ effective noise cancelation, sound customization options through the app, and robust battery life of nearly 43 hours.
 

 Anker Soundcore Space One
 Anker Soundcore Space One
 Comfortable fit • Easy controls • Soundcore app
 MSRP: $99.99
 Luxury features at a budget price.
 Listen and be heard with the Jabra Elite 45h
 The Jabra Elite 45h on-ear Bluetooth headphones next to a Samsung Galaxy S10e smartphone and wireless car keys on a white table.
 Bluetooth multipoint is available but not very reliable.
 The Jabra Elite 45h are on-ear headphones designed to be compact and portable enough to take anywhere—whether you’re commuting to work, running errands, or just putting your feet up at home. The swivel ear cups make it easy to shove into a backpack for easy transport.
 

 

 Top Deals
 See all deals
 

 Sennheiser Momentum 4 Wireless
 37% off
 See price at Best Buy
 

 

 Sony WH-CH720N Headphones
 48% off
 See price at Amazon
 

 Sony SRS-XE200 X-Series Speaker
 47% off
 See price at Amazon
 Limited Time Deal!
 

 Edifier G2000 Gaming Speakers
 34% off
 See price at Amazon
 Limited Time Deal!
 

 Edifier G1000 Gaming Speakers
 41% off
 See price at Best Buy
 Deal of the Day!
 

 JBL Vibe Beam
 40% off
 See price at Amazon
 Limited Time Deal!
 The headphones’ bass-heavy frequency response makes it hard to hear higher-pitched vocals. Fortunately, you can create a custom EQ in the Jabra Sound+ app (Android/iOS) and tinker all day long. If you don’t want to experiment, Jabra has a hearing test that informs an optimized sound profile.
 

 One of the best aspects of the Jabra Elite 45h is its microphone. It reproduces voices accurately, and even people with deep voices will be heard loud and clear. The microphone also does a good job of attenuating background noise and light wind, eliminating audible distractions during conference calls.
 

 Other features that make the Jabra Elite 45h a worthy investment include a 50+ hour battery life, USB-C fast charging, AAC codec support (which is great for iOS users), and an included two-year warranty that covers dust and water damage.