U.S. Policies Several executive branch and congressional actions have set the stage for increased development and deployment of offshore wind energy on the U.S. OCS.13 For example, Section 388 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (P.L. 109-58) amended the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. §§1331-1356c) to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to offer leases, easements, and rights-of-way for offshore renewable energy activities on the U.S. OCS.14 BOEM is the lead agency for the U.S. OCS renewable energy leasing program.15 In the 117th Congress, Section 50251 of the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 (P.L. 117-196) expanded BOEM’s authority to pursue offshore wind leasing in federal waters in the southeastern Atlantic region, in the eastern Gulf of Mexico, and off U.S. territories.16 On the executive side, the Biden Administration suggested a doubling of offshore wind by 2030 as one potential approach to address climate change in Executive Order (E.O.) 14008, “Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad.”17 In March 2021, the Biden Administration announced a government-wide effort to deploy 30 gigawatts (or 30,000 megawatts) of offshore wind energy by 2030.18 In September 2022, the Administration announced a related goal to deploy 15 gigawatts (or 15,000 megawatts) of installed floating offshore wind (i.e., structures that are not set into the ocean floor) by 2035.19 As of December 2023, BOEM has conducted 12 competitive wind energy lease sales for areas on the OCS, representing more than 2.5 million acres of commercial wind energy lease areas offshore of Delaware, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and California.20 

Background on Offshore Wind Energy Project Development Stakeholders have expressed concerns regarding potential impacts to the marine ecosystem and associated species that pertain to offshore wind project activities associated with site development, construction, operation, and decommissioning.21 The following sections provide background on offshore wind energy turbine structures and discuss activities associated with offshore wind projects, including the potential impacts of these activities on the marine ecosystem and species. 

Potential Impacts of Offshore Wind Energy on the Marine Ecosystem and Associated Species Offshore wind projects may affect the marine ecosystem and associated species. Not all impacts may be adverse; some may be beneficial (e.g., the artificial reef effect, discussed below). In general, OWF activities can impact wildlife through 
atmospheric and oceanic change,43 • marine habitat alteration, • collision risk, • electromagnetic field (EMF) effects associated with power cables,44 • noise effects, and • water quality (e.g., pollution).45 The scientific literature analyzes the short-term adverse impacts and benefits of offshore wind development to marine mammals, invertebrates, fish, sea turtles, birds, bats, and other components of the marine ecosystem (Table 1).46 Modeling and observational studies (mostly derived from the North Sea) show that most impacts (e.g., habitat alteration) occur within the immediate vicinity of the wind turbine array, with other impacts (e.g., noise effects) extending up to tens of kilometers outside the array.47 Some of these analyses use land-based wind energy observations to model potential offshore wind scenarios, and other analyses extrapolate observations from existing OWFs (again, mostly in the North Sea) to planned offshore wind energy projects. Other potential impacts are informed by laboratory studies mimicking conditions (e.g., noise levels) often associated with offshore wind projects. The sections below discuss the potential OWF impacts (both adverse and beneficial) to the ocean environment and selected wildlife. 

Issues for Congress The full extent of impacts of offshore wind activities on the marine ecosystem of the U.S. OCS remains unclear, in part because the development of U.S. offshore wind projects is relatively recent. If interest in the climate mitigation benefits derived from offshore wind energy grows in the United States and BOEM continues to issue leases for offshore wind development, Congress may continue to consider how offshore wind energy development may impact the marine ecosystem and associated species.231 In the 118th Congress, some Members called for additional research into the potential harm offshore wind projects may cause to marine wildlife or expressed concern about the potential impacts offshore wind activities might have on other ocean uses (e.g., H.R. 1). 