Sec. 16.02. - Greenwood Cemetery Declared Public Cemetery of City; Description; Map; Use.
 The tract of land, being the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 31, Township 22 South, Range 30 East, according to a plat recorded at the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County in Deed Book 87, page 227, is declared to be the public cemetery of the City, to be known as Greenwood Cemetery. An official map of the Greenwood Cemetery shall at all times be on file at the office of the supervisor of Greenwood Cemetery. The cemetery is set apart only for the burial, entombment or inurnment of human remains and shall only be used as such in perpetuity.
 

 (Ord. of 6-27-1977, § 1; Ord. of 3-30-1981, § 1)
 

 Sec. 16.03. - Greenwood Cemetery Not Perpetual Care Cemetery.
 Greenwood Cemetery is not one of perpetual care and the City shall be under no obligation to maintain any set standard for its care and upkeep. The City shall endeavor to provide general maintenance and care to the cemetery in keeping with the reminder that it is sacredly devoted to the interment, entombment or inurnment of the dead.
 

 (Ord. of 6-27-1977, § 1)
 

 Sec. 16.04. - Burials in City Restricted to Greenwood Cemetery and Washington Park Cemetery.
 No human body shall be buried within the City limits of the City of Orlando, except in Greenwood Cemetery or in Washington Park Cemetery if a privately owned cemetery, or in such other cemetery facilities and/or property as the City Council may from time to time designate, acquire or control.
 ...
 Sec. 16.10. - Spaces; Sale to Permanent Residents; Exceptions.
 The City shall only sell spaces in Greenwood Cemetery for prices fixed by the City Council to residents of the City of Orlando who have resided within the corporate limits of the City for a period of more than one year prior to the date of sale, and to persons who are not permanent residents of the City provided that such sales shall be only for the immediate burial of a permanent resident of the City who met the residency requirements hereunder at the time of the resident's death. The Sexton of the Greenwood Cemetery shall require satisfactory evidence of such prior residence within the City. In addition, the City may sell spaces in Blocks 12, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 of Greenwood Cemetery to non-City, as well as City residents.
 

 Provided, however, that a person who has not met the residency requirements set forth herein may be permitted to purchase spaces in Greenwood Cemetery at the price established by City Council for qualified non-residents if such person is related by blood or marriage to a deceased person buried in said cemetery, unless such deceased person is interred in a section of the cemetery reserved for members of the American Legion, Spanish-American War Veterans, Grand Army of the Republic, Independent Order of Odd Fellows, or United Confederate Veterans, and such deceased person, at the time of his or her death, did not meet City residency requirements.
 ...
 Sec. 16.13. - Sales to Non-Family Members; City's Right of First Refusal.
 A space owner may sell or transfer his or her space only to a relative by blood or marriage, provided however, a space owner may sell or transfer his or her space to a person not related by blood or marriage if the owner receives approval of said sale from City Council. In the event a space owner wishes to sell or transfer his or her space to a person other than a relative by blood or marriage in a sale or transfer not approved by City Council, the owner shall first offer in writing the space for sale to the City of Orlando. The City may repurchase the space for the original purchase price or one-half of the current sales price, whichever is greater, less a recording fee if the deed from the City to the owner is not recorded. If the City wishes to purchase the space, the City shall notify the owner thereof within five (5) days of receipt of notice, and the sale shall be closed within five (5) days after receipt by the City of evidence of title to the space satisfactory to the Office of Legal Affairs.
 ...
 Sec. 16.14. - Declaration; Rights If No Declaration.
 The owner of a space may present his or her deed to the Cemetery Supervisor designating in writing persons entitled to be buried in the space or spaces owned. This designation may be amended at any time by the owner(s) in the same manner as the original designation. Only relatives by blood or marriage may be designated under this section; provided however, persons other than relatives by blood or marriage may be designated if the owner receives approval of said designation from City Council. In the event the owner fails to designate burial rights for the space or spaces owned, and in the event the property is not transferred or conveyed as provided herein, the right of interment in the space or spaces shall be in the following order:
 

 (1)One space, niche or crypt shall be forever reserved for the owner and one for the owner's surviving spouse, if any.(2)The remaining spaces shall pass to the heirs or devisees of the owner in the same manner as real property passes under Florida Law: provided, however, that no person shall be interred in a space passing under this section unless such person would have been eligible under the provisions of this Chapter to be designated for burial in such space at the date of such person's death or the interment of said person is approved by City Council.
 

 Sec. 16.15. - Rights Upon Interment.
 Whenever an interment of the remains of any person is made in a space, the space thereby becomes inalienable and shall be held as the space of the interred person except in the case of cremated remains as set forth in Section 16.17.
 ...
 Sec. 16.17. - Interments in General.
 All earth interments shall be in a liner or vault of concrete or steel of a type approved by the cemetery Supervisor. No more than the remains of one body shall be interred in any one space, vault or crypt, except in the case of a mother and stillborn child(ren). However, if written permission is given by the owner of a space or, if the owner is deceased, by the owner's heirs, permitting more than the remains of one person to occupy a space, vault or crypt, an exception will be made to permit no more than one regular interment and one cremain or two cremains in any one space, vault or crypt.
 

 Installation of cremorial headstones may be permitted under the same number, size and material restrictions as set forth in Section 16.26; provided, however, that in cases where the use of a cremorial headstone causes the total number of allowable interments or inurnments in any one space to be exceeded, each additional inurnment shall be charged a fee as set forth by City Council for right of additional interment.
 ...
 Sec. 16.29. - Children; Pets.
 No child under fifteen (15) years of age shall be permitted in the cemetery unless accompanied by an adult. Pets shall be prohibited in the cemetery.
 ...
 Sec. 16.35. - Double Interment Permitted.
 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.17 hereof, no more than the remains of two (2) bodies shall be interred in any one space in Block 12 of Greenwood Cemetery, provided that a mother and a stillborn child shall be considered one body. All interments in Block 12 shall be in a vault installed by the City of Orlando.