IMPACT ON WORKFORCE
While automation will cause significant changes in the composition of employment, it will not cause mass
unemployment. Quite the contrary, displaced workers will fill new higher-value-add jobs, and the labor force
is likely to increase. The positive impact associated with the retraining of soldiers after World War II8 is quite
instructive. The economy assimilated returning soldiers surprisingly well, boosting productivity significantly.
Though, as automation accelerates job turnover, the cost of friction in the labor market, which currently
stands at more than $630B per annum is expected to grow. These frictions present tremendous opportunity
for companies that help firms reduce time-to-hire, provide workers with new skill-sets, and train new
employees more efficiently.
In the United States today, 5.4 million jobs are unfilled because of skillset mismatches, as shown below.
ARK’s research indicates that recruiting and training account for over 2/3 the cost of friction in the labor
market. The opportunity for recruiting and retraining has never been better.
Some companies already are responding. In 2013, corporate spending on training increased by 15%, to $70
billion and then increased another 10% in 2014.9 Companies such as Cornerstone on Demand (CSOD), Manpower (MAN), Robert Half (RHI), DeVry (DV), Adecco (AHEXY), and LinkedIn (LNKD), which
acquired Lynda.com, offer career skill-building programs, and should benefit significantly as automation
permeates more industries. 

The productivity associated with automation will have a profound impact on economic growth. According
to ARK’s research, real GDP per worker in the US will double from $113,000 in 2013 to $236,000 in
2035, or at an annual rate of 3.4%. Without automation, productivity would increase at roughly half that
rate, or 1.8%, limiting real GDP per worker to $167,000, as shown below. As automation proliferates,
the growth of real GDP per worker will accelerate from 2.2% during the next ten years, to roughly 5%
between 2025 and 2035.
By 2035, real GDP will be 42% higher with automation than without it, as shown below. It will reach
roughly $40 trillion, or nearly $12 trillion above the $28 trillion that would otherwise be the case. Clearly,
the extra $12 trillion in extra GDP will bring with it many more new jobs.

Robotics ecosystems will create new industries and accelerate their growth. Companies already pioneering
this movement include Google (GOOG) and Tesla (TSLA) in the autonomous vehicle market, as well as
AeroVironment (AVAV), Amazon (AMZN) and Elbit Systems (ESLT) in the drone space. Service robots are
in their infancy, but could undergo explosive growth. Early examples include vacuum and lawnmower
robots manufactured by iRobot (IRBT), medical robots by Intuitive Surgical (ISRG), and industrial
robots by KUKA (KUKAY). Even more embryonic are ReWalk’s10 (RWLK) robot exoskeletons enabling
paraplegics to walk.11 Other companies benefitting from these trends manufacture sensors, microcontrollers,
cameras, batteries, computerized numerical controls, and materials required for production. Cognex (CGNX),
Ambarella (AMBA), Panasonic (PCRFY), Fanuc (FANUY), and Rockwell Automation (ROK) will be
prime beneficiaries.

Automation will permeate every sector of the economy, with accommodation and food services,
agriculture, and retail trade garnering the biggest boosts to productivity. By 2035, GDP per worker
will increase by 58% in the accommodation and food services sector, 55% in agriculture, and 53% in
retail trade, as depicted below. Spending on automation is poised to soar orders of magnitude above current investment levels. Cumulatively,
it will increase by roughly $3.8 trillion through 2035. As artificial intelligence solves increasingly complex
problems, the return on investment from “smarter” robots, drones, and automation will drive adoption.
Between 2015 and 2035, annual investment in automation could increase at a 16.5% annual growth rate
from $11 billion to $242 billion, as illustrated below. During the next decade it should compound at a 33%
annual rate. Given the declining cost curves in technology, unit growth rates could be even higher.
Several sectors will spend disproportionately on automation to boost productivity. In 2035, manufacturing
will account for the largest percentage, 13% of the total, or $31 billion. Spearheaded by companies like Amazon (AMZN), the retail sector will spend roughly $26 billion, or 11% of the total investment. In 2014,
Amazon boosted the number of Kiva robots in its global distribution centers from 1,000 to 15,000, a fifteen
fold increase in one year, and then doubled its Kiva install base to 30,000 in 2015. Game on! Closely related
to retail, the accommodation and food services category is set to spend $24 billion as shown in figure 9.