Funding Limitations on Medical Marijuana Prosecutions In each fiscal year since FY2015, Congress has included provisions in appropriations acts that prohibit DOJ from using appropriated funds to prevent certain states and territories and the District of Columbia from “implementing their own laws that authorize the use, distribution, possession, or cultivation of medical marijuana.” The FY2024 provision lists 52 jurisdictions, including every U.S. jurisdiction that had legalized medical cannabis use at the time it was enacted. On its face, the appropriations rider bars DOJ from taking legal action against the states directly in order to prevent them from promulgating or enforcing medical marijuana laws. In addition, federal courts have interpreted the rider to prohibit certain federal prosecutions of private individuals or organizations that Congressional Research Service 3 produce, distribute, or possess marijuana in accordance with state medical marijuana laws. In those cases, criminal defendants have invoked the rider before trial, seeking either the dismissal of their indictments or injunctions barring prosecution. By contrast, courts have generally declined to apply the rider outside the context of initial criminal prosecutions. For instance, the Ninth Circuit has held that the provision does not “impact[ ] the ability of a federal district court to restrict the use of medical marijuana as a condition of probation.” In the 2016 case United States v. McIntosh, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit considered the circumstances in which the appropriations rider bars CSA prosecution of marijuana-related activities. The court held that the rider prohibits the federal government only from preventing the implementation of those specific rules of state law that authorize the use, distribution, possession, or cultivation of medical marijuana. DOJ does not prevent the implementation of [such rules] when it prosecutes individuals who engage in conduct unauthorized under state medical marijuana laws. Individuals who do not strictly comply with all state-law conditions regarding the use, distribution, possession, and cultivation of medical marijuana have engaged in conduct that is unauthorized, and prosecuting such individuals does not violate [the rider]. Relying on McIntosh, the Ninth Circuit has issued several decisions allowing federal prosecution of individuals who did not “strictly comply” with state medical marijuana laws, notwithstanding the appropriations rider, and several district courts have followed that reasoning. As one example, in United States v. Evans, the Ninth Circuit upheld the prosecution of two individuals involved in the production of medical marijuana who smoked marijuana as they processed plants for sale. Although state law permitted medical marijuana use by “qualifying patients,” the court concluded that the defendants failed to show they were qualifying patients, and thus they could be prosecuted because their personal marijuana use did not strictly comply with state medical marijuana law. In the 2022 case United States v. Bilodeau, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit also considered the scope of the appropriations rider. The defendants in Bilodeau were registered with the State of Maine to produce medical marijuana, but DOJ alleged that they distributed large quantities of marijuana to individuals who were not qualifying patients under Maine law, including recipients in other states. Following indictment for criminal CSA violations, the defendants sought to invoke the appropriations rider to bar their prosecutions. They argued that the rider “must be read to preclude the DOJ, under most circumstances, from prosecuting persons who possess state licenses to partake in medical marijuana activity.” DOJ instead urged the court to apply the Ninth Circuit’s standard, allowing prosecution unless the defendants could show that they acted in strict compliance with state medical marijuana laws. The First Circuit declined to adopt either of the proposed tests. As an initial matter, the court agreed with the Ninth Circuit that the rider means “DOJ may not spend funds to bring prosecutions if doing so prevents a state from giving practical effect to its medical marijuana laws.” However, the panel declined to adopt the Ninth Circuit’s holding that the rider bars prosecution only in cases where defendants strictly complied with state law. The court noted that the text of the rider does not explicitly require strict compliance with state law and that, given the complexity of state marijuana regulations, “the potential for technical noncompliance [with state law] is real enough that no person through any reasonable effort could always assure strict compliance.” Thus, the First Circuit concluded that requiring strict compliance with state law would likely chill state-legal medical marijuana activities and prevent the states from giving effect to their medical marijuana laws. On the other hand, the court also rejected the defendants’ more expansive reading of the rider, reasoning that “Congress surely did not intend for the rider to provide a safe harbor to all caregivers with facially valid documents without regard for blatantly illegitimate activity.” Ultimately, while the First Circuit held that the rider bars CSA prosecution in at least some cases where the defendant has committed minor technical violations of state medical marijuana laws, it declined to Congressional Research Service 4 “fully define [the] precise boundaries” of its alternative standard. On the record before it, the court concluded that “the defendants’ cultivation, possession, and distribution of marijuana aimed at supplying persons whom no defendant ever thought were qualifying patients under Maine law” and that a CSA conviction in those circumstances would not “prevent Maine’s medical marijuana laws from having their intended practical effect.” Considerations for Congress It remains to be seen whether and how the difference in reasoning between the Ninth Circuit and the First Circuit will make a practical difference in federal marijuana prosecutions. In theory, the First Circuit’s analysis could make it easier for defendants to invoke the appropriations rider to bar federal prosecutions, because they could do so even if they had not been in strict compliance with state law. In practice, however, resource limitations and enforcement priorities have historically meant that federal marijuana prosecutions target only individuals and organizations that have clearly not complied with state law. Thus, one of the First Circuit judges who considered Bilodeau agreed with the panel’s interpretation of the rider but wrote a concurrence noting that, in practice, the First Circuit’s standard might not be “materially different from the one that the Ninth Circuit applied.” While the medical marijuana appropriations rider restricts DOJ’s ability to bring some marijuana prosecutions, its effect is limited in several ways. First, marijuana-related activities that fall outside the scope of the appropriations rider remain subject to prosecution under the CSA. By its terms, the rider applies only to state laws related to medical marijuana; it does not bar prosecution of any activities related to recreational marijuana, even if those activities are permitted under state law. Second, as the Ninth Circuit has explained, even where the rider does apply, it “does not provide immunity from prosecution for federal marijuana offenses”—it simply restricts DOJ’s ability to expend funds to enforce federal law for as long as it remains in effect. If Congress instead opted to repeal the rider or allow it to lapse, DOJ would be able to prosecute future CSA violations as well as past violations that occurred while the rider was in effect, subject to the applicable statute of limitations. Third, participants in the cannabis industry may face numerous collateral consequences arising from the federal prohibition of marijuana in areas including bankruptcy, taxation, and immigration. Many of those legal consequences attach regardless of whether a person is charged with or convicted of a CSA offense, meaning the rider would not affect them. Because the medical marijuana appropriations rider applies to marijuana specifically, regardless of how the substance is classified under the CSA, rescheduling marijuana would not affect the rider. Congress has the authority to enact legislation to clarify or alter the scope of the appropriations rider, repeal the rider, or decline to include it in future appropriations laws. For instance, Congress could amend the rider to specify whether strict compliance with state medical marijuana law is required in order to bar prosecution under the CSA or provide a different standard that DOJ and the courts should apply. Beyond the appropriations context, Congress could also consider other changes to federal marijuana law that would affect its interaction with state law. Such changes could take the form of more stringent marijuana regulation—for instance, through increased DOJ funding to prosecute CSA violations or limiting federal funds for states that legalize marijuana. In contrast, most recent proposals before Congress seek to relax federal restrictions on marijuana or mitigate the disparity between federal and state marijuana regulation.