**Mismatch repair deficiency doesn’t always boost immunotherapy response**

Mismatch repair deficiency occurs when tumor cells have a mutation in one of several genes that normally correct mistakes in the DNA code. Without that DNA spellchecker, the tumor constantly accumulates genetic mutations, leading to a high tumor mutational burden. To investigate why some tumors with deficient mismatch repair don’t respond to immune checkpoint inhibitors, Dr. Westcott and his colleagues genetically engineered mice to spontaneously grow lung or colorectal tumors that were either deficient in mismatch repair or had functioning mismatch repair.  Tumors that were deficient in mismatch repair had many more mutations than tumors with functioning mismatch repair, the researchers confirmed.  When they treated both sets of mice with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, they found an unexpected result: mismatch repair–deficient tumors didn’t shrink any more than tumors with functioning mismatch repair. In further experiments, the team figured out why. It came down to both the diversity and the type of mutations in the tumors, Dr. Westcott explained.
The mismatch repair–deficient tumors had a lot of genetic diversity, meaning each mutation was only in a small fraction of cancer cells. And cancer-killing immune cells couldn't efficiently attack tumors with high genetic diversity, the researchers found. But when they created tumors in which all of the cancer cells had the same mutations, immune checkpoint inhibitors shrank the tumors and kept them at bay for months. The type of mutation also appeared to influence how immune system responds to tumors. Some mutations cause tumor cells to produce abnormal bits of proteins on their surface, called neoantigens. Neoantigens help the immune system spot cancer cells, whereas other types of mutations are less likely to jump-start the immune system.  Cancer-killing immune cells launched a massive attack against tumors in which all of the cancer cells had the same neoantigen, called clonal neoantigens. But that attack weakened when only a fraction of the cancer cells had the neoantigen, the researchers found.