Digital Vehicle Compass 


63-1120 OWNER’S MANUAL — Please read before using this equipment. 


Thank you for purchasing a RadioShack Digital Vehicle Compass. 
Your compass conveniently provides accurate heading 
information inside your vehicle. It incorporates the same magnetic 
sensor technology that is used in factory-installed vehicle 
compasses. The compass electronically separates the Earth’s 
magnetic field from the magnetic fields generated by your vehicle, 
to provide accurate compass headings. 


Automatic Shut-Off — conserves power by turning off the 
compass about 10 minutes after you park the vehicle when there 
are no significant changes in the surrounding magnetic fields. 


Magnetic Distortion Detection — alerts you when outside 
magnetic interference is affecting compass accuracy. 


INSTALLING BATTERIES 


Your compass requires two AAA batteries (not supplied) for 
power. For the best performance and longest life, we recommend 
RadioShack batteries. Battery life is about 11 months (based on 
an average of 8 hours of compass use and 2 hours of backlight 
use per week). 


Cautions: 


• Use only fresh batteries of the required size and 
recommended type. 


• Do not mix old and new batteries, different types of batteries 
(standard, alkaline, or rechargeable), or rechargeable 
batteries of different capacities. 




@ RadioShack 


www.radioshack.com™ 




© 2001 RadioShack Corporation. All Rights 
Reserved. 


RadioShack and RadioShack.com are trademarks 
used by RadioShack Corporation. 





1. Slide the battery compartment cover in the direction of the 
OPEN arrow to remove it. 


2. Place two AAA batteries in the compartment as indicated by 
the polarity symbols (+ and -) marked inside. 


3. Replace the cover. All the arrows flash. After you install or 
replace batteries, you must calibrate the compass (see 
“Calibrating the Compass” on Page 4). 


If all the arrows and digits flash, and the backlight turns on when 
you turn on the compass, replace the batteries or use vehicle 
battery power (see “Using Vehicle Battery Power”). 


Warning: Dispose of old batteries promptly and properly. Do not 
burn or bury them. 


Caution: If you do not plan to use the compass for a month or 
more, remove the batteries. Batteries can leak chemicals that can 
destroy electronic parts. 


USING VEHICLE BATTERY POWER 


This compass is designed to be used with RadioShack’s 12V DC 
adapter Cat. No. 270-031A (available at your local RadioShack 
store). Using any other adapter could void the warranty and 
damage the compass. 


You can power the compass from a vehicle’s 12V power source 
(such as cigarette-lighter socket) using a 12V, 3 amp DC adapter 
(not supplied, available at your local RadioShack store). 


Cautions: 


A You must use a power source that supplies 12V DC 
. and delivers at least 3 amps. Its center tip must be set 

2 

to positive and its plug must fit the compass' jack. Using an 
adapter that does not meet these specifications could 
damage the compass or the adapter. 


• Always connect the DC adapter to the compass before you 
connect it to the power source. When you finish, disconnect 
the adapter from the power source before you disconnect it 
from the compass. 


Note: Since not all vehicles have constant power supplied to the 
power outlet, two AAA batteries are required to retain the 
compass calibration settings in memory (although they do not 
power the compass when vehicle battery power is used). 


Insert the barrel plug of the 12V DC adapter (not supplied) into the 
DC12V jack on the back of the compass. Then insert the DC plug 
into your vehicle’s power outlet. 


MOUNTING THE COMPASS 


Choose a clean mounting location on the vehicle’s windshield 
where the compass is at least 5 inches away from any stereo 
speakers and will not obstruct the driver’s field of view. 


Your compass comes with three suction cups for secure 
mounting. 


1. Insert the small ball head of each suction cup into the larger 
hole on the bottom of the bracket and slide it into the 
bracket’s smaller hole so it fits tightly. 


2. Place the compass in the holder. 


Note: To remove the compass from the holder, simply slide it 
out. 

3 

3. Firmly press 

the bracket 
with the

Vertical Plane 

4. Adjust the 
angle of the 

windshield.

against the 
vehicle’s 

compass 

20' maximum down tilt 

20 maximum up tilt Horizontal Plane 


bracket so > 


that the face 


of the compass points to the back of the vehicle. Then adjust 
the bracket to an angle no more than 20° above or below the 
horizontal plane. 


5. Tighten the bracket’s screw to hold it at the desired angle. 


Caution: If you use a reflective sun shade, do not leave the 
compass between the sun shade and the windshield. The 
extreme heat might damage the compass. 


Note: Your compass will not calibrate correctly and will not be 
accurate unless it is mounted so the display faces the back of your 
vehicle and is titled no more than 20° above or below the 
horizontal plane. The selected angle must stay fixed after 
calibration for the compass to remain accurate. 


CALIBRATING THE COMPASS 

Calibration enables the compass to separate the earth’s magnetic 
field from the magnetic fields generated by external influences 
(such as your vehicle) so it can provide accurate heading 
information. 

4 

When calibrating the compass, you must drive your vehicle in one 
complete circle. Be sure your vehicle is on level ground in an open 
area, such as a parking lot. 


The size of the circle and the direction your vehicle points when 
beginning or ending the circle do not matter. The circle does not 
need to be perfect, but it must be completed within 2 minutes. 


Important: If you do not calibrate your compass properly, it will 
not work correctly or accurately. You must calibrate your compass 
when you use it the first time and recalibrate it anytime: 


• you move the compass to a different location 


• you adjust the bracket/display angle 


• you remove and replace the batteries 


• BIST appears steadily 


• all the arrows flash 


1. Ensure the compass is securely mounted (see “Mounting the 
Compass” on Page 3). 


2. Hold down LIGHT and POWER at the same time until all 
arrows flash at the same time. 


Note: If you have just installed/replaced the batteries, all the 
arrows and digits briefly appear, then all the arrows flash at 
the same time and the backlight turns on. Begin from Step 3 
to calibrate your compass. 


3. Press POWER. The arrows appear one at a time. 


4. With the compass mounted, drive in one complete circle and 
then press POWER. The current compass heading appears. 

5 

Note: If you press LIGHT while calibrating your compass (except 
after installing/replacing batteries), the compass does not store 
the calibration setting and the original setting is unchanged. 


USING THE COMPASS 


The 8 displayed cardinal points for this compass are N, NE, E, SE, 
S, SW, W, and NW. 


Distortion Detection 


When DiST appears, the compass is detecting magnetic 
interference that compromises its accuracy. Distortion occurs 
when there has been a significant change in the surrounding 
magnetic fields, such as when you are driving under an overpass, 
or over a bridge. The steel in these structures causes inaccurate 
readings in any magnetic compass, but unlike other compasses, 
this compass detects interference and alerts you. 


If DIST appears continuously, recalibrate your compass (see 
“Calibrating the Compass” on Page 4). 


Turning the Compass On and Off 


Press POWER to turn the compass on and off. Or, you can press 
LIGHT to turn on the compass and the backlight. 


To turn off the compass and the backlight, press POWER. 


Important: The compass automatically turns off after about 10 
minutes to conserve power if no significant changes occur in the 
surrounding magnetic fields. 

6 

Using the Backlight 


To turn on the backlight, press LIGHT. To turn off the backlight, 
press LIGHT again. 


The backlight automatically turns off after about 1 minute if it is 
powered by internal batteries. It automatically turns off after about 
10 minutes if it is powered by vehicle battery power, unless 
significant changes occur in the surrounding magnetic fields. 


CARE 


Keep the compass dry; if it gets wet, wipe it dry immediately. Use 
and store the compass only in normal temperature environments. 
Handle the compass carefully; do not drop it. Keep the compass 
away from dust and dirt, and wipe it with a damp cloth 
occasionally to keep it looking new. 


Modifying or tampering with the compass’ internal components 
can cause a malfunction and might invalidate its warranty. If your 
compass is not performing as it should, take it to your local 
RadioShack store for assistance.
