So, how do you actually implement the investment plan outlined above? As mentioned in the first 
section, your biggest priority is to get yourself out of debt; until that point, the only investing you 
should be doing is with the minimum 401(k) or other defined contribution savings required to “max 
out” your employer match; beyond that, you should earmark every spare penny to eliminating your 
student and consumer debt. 
Next, you’ll need an emergency fund placed in T-bills, CDs, or money market accounts; this should be 
enough for six months of living expenses, and should be in a taxable account. (Putting your emergency 
money in a 401(k) or IRA is a terrible idea, since if you need it, you’ll almost certainly have to pay a 
substantial tax penalty to get it out.) 
Then, and only then, can you start to save seriously for retirement. For most young people, this will 
mean some mix of an employer-based plan, such as a 401(k), individual IRA accounts, and taxable 
accounts. 
There are two kinds of IRA accounts: traditional and Roth. The main difference between the two comes 
when you pay taxes on them; with a traditional account, you get a tax deduction on the contributions, 
and pay taxes when the money is withdrawn, generally after age 59½. (You can withdraw money 
before 59½, but, with a few important exceptions, you’ll pay a substantial tax penalty for doing so.) 
With a Roth, it’s the opposite: you contribute with money you’ve already paid taxes on, but pay no 
taxes on withdrawals in retirement. 
There’s thus not a lot of difference between a 401(k) and a traditional IRA; in fact, you can seamlessly 
roll the former into the latter after you leave your employer. In general, the Roth is a better deal than a 
traditional IRA, since not only can you contribute “more” to the Roth (since $5,500—the current 
annual contribution limit—of after-tax dollars is worth a lot more than $5,500 in pre-tax dollars), but 
also you’re hopefully in a higher tax bracket when you retire. 
Your goal, as mentioned, is to save at least 15 percent of your salary in some combination of 
401(k)/IRA/taxable savings. But in reality, the best strategy is to save as much as you can, and don’t
stop doing so until the day you die. 
The optimal strategy for most young people is thus to first max out their 401(k) match, then contribute 
the maximum to a Roth IRA (assuming they’re not making too much money to qualify for the Roth, 
approximately $200,000 for a married couple and $120,000 for a single person), then save in a taxable 
account on top of that. 
A frequent problem with 401(k) plans is the quality of the fund offerings. You should look carefully at 
the fund expenses offered in your employer’s plan. If its expense ratios are in general more than 1.0%, 
then you have a lousy one, and you should contribute only up to the match. If its expenses are in 
general lower than 0.5%, and particularly if it includes Vanguard’s index funds or Fidelity’s Spartanclass funds (which have fees as low as Vanguard’s), then you might consider making significant 
voluntary contributions in excess of the match limits. For most young savers, fully maxing out 
voluntary 401(k) contributions (assuming you have a “good” 401(k) with low expenses) and the annual 
Roth limit will get them well over the 15 percent savings target. 
Your contributions to your 401(k), IRA, and taxable accounts should be made equally to the indexed 
U.S. stock, foreign stock, and bond funds available to you. Once per year, you should “rebalance” them
back to equal status. In the good years, this will mean selling some stocks, which you should avoid 
doing in a taxable account, since this will incur capital gains taxes. In practice, this means keeping a 
fair amount of your stock holdings in a tax sheltered 401(k) or IRA. This will not be a problem for the 
typical young investor, since he or she will have a relatively small amount of his or her assets in a 
taxable account.