Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
- 1 -
Induction of Labor
What is induction of labor?
Induction of labor is a medical procedure that softens the cervix (the opening
to the womb or uterus) and starts contractions (muscle movements that help
push the baby out of the uterus). This procedure is a way to plan when your
labor (childbirth) will start, instead of waiting until labor starts on its own. The
goal of an induction is to have a safe vaginal birth within 24 hours.
What happens during an induction procedure?
We use standard medications and techniques to soften and dilate (widen) the
cervix so it can reach 10 centimeters (cm) wide. A safe and effective induction
procedure includes the following:
Misoprostol (Cytotec®)
• This is a small pill that your provider will place in the
vagina every 3 hours at the start of your induction until the
cervix is 3-4 cm dilated.
• Misoprostol causes your cervix to soften and open and
starts your contractions.
Balloon
• When your cervix is between 1-3 cm dilated, your provider
will place a soft balloon at the top of the cervix. This
causes your cervix to soften and dilate.
• This balloon can also be placed in the OB Triage or in the
clinic before your scheduled induction. Then you will be
admitted to the hospital later in the day.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Induction of Labor
- 2 -
• Misoprostol is used in combination with the balloon.
Amniotomy
• When your cervix is around 3-4 cm dilated, your provider
will remove the balloon. Then they will use a device to
break the bag of water around your baby. This procedure is
called an amniotomy.
• The amniotomy causes more contractions to help labor
progress.
Oxytocin (Pitocin®)
• Starting around when your cervix is 3-4 cm dilated, your
provider will give you oxytocin through an IV (a needle
inserted into your vein).
• This medication causes contractions, and it can be easily
increased or decreased to avoid having too many
contractions. Sometimes oxytocin is also used instead of
misoprostol earlier in the induction process.
Other steps throughout your induction procedure:
• We will do cervical exams every 2-4 hours to confirm that the induction
process is going well.
• We will do continuous fetal monitoring (medical checks on the baby) to
make sure that the baby is doing well throughout the process.
• We will place an IV at the start of your induction.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Induction of Labor
- 3 -
Timeline (by centimeters dilated) of the induction procedures and medications:
What are the benefits of induction?
Induction for a medical reason
For some medical conditions, induction of labor is recommended to reduce the
risk of complications (medical problems) for both the pregnant person and the
baby. Timing your birth instead of waiting for spontaneous labor (whenever
labor naturally starts on its own) decreases the chance that your medical
conditions will get worse. It also decreases the risk of stillbirth (when a baby
dies during pregnancy or birth). Some of these medical conditions include:
• Pre-eclampsia and high blood pressure
• Diabetes
• Low amniotic fluid (oligohydramnios)
• When the baby is much smaller than expected
Ask your doctor, nurse, or midwife if you have a condition where early birth is
recommended.
Induction after 39 weeks of pregnancy
Induction of labor can be done safely after 39 weeks for pregnant people who
do not have a medical reason for early birth. Potential benefits include:
• Reduced risk of developing high blood pressure or pre-eclampsia later in
pregnancy
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Induction of Labor
- 4 -
• Decreased risk of stillbirth (if induced before 42 weeks)
• Possibly making it less likely that you will need a Cesarean birth (a
surgery to deliver a baby through a cut made through the belly, also
called a C-section)
What are the risks of induction?
• We monitor the baby’s heartbeat continuously because sometimes labor
can be harmful to babies. If this is the case, you might need urgent or
emergency interventions (including Cesarean birth).
• An induction of labor can fail if your cervix does not dilate to 10 cm,
despite all efforts to help labor progress. If this happens, you will need a
Cesarean birth. Your doctor, midwife and nurse will regularly keep you
updated on next steps for care.
• If an induction takes too long (more than 24 hours), there is a higher risk
of bleeding, infection, and Cesarean birth.
• Patients who are induced have a longer hospital stay before birth
compared to patients who have spontaneous labor.
• It may be harder for you to rest during the early parts of your labor.
What are alternatives to induction?
• Waiting for spontaneous labor
• Cesarean birth
How can I help my induction go well?
• During the early part of the induction, try to rest as much as possible,
drink fluids, and snack lightly.
• When your contractions get stronger, rock on a birth ball or use the
shower to make yourself more comfortable. Being upright (instead of
lying down) and active helps your labor move forward.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Induction of Labor
- 5 -
Disclaimer: This document contains information and/or instructional materials developed by
University of Michigan (U-M) Health for the typical patient with your condition. It may include
links to online content that was not created by U-M Health and for which U-M Health does not
assume responsibility. It does not replace medical advice from your health care provider
because your experience may differ from that of the typical patient. Talk to your health care
provider if you have any questions about this document, your condition, or your treatment
plan.
Authors: Joanne Bailey, CNM PhD, Jourdan Triebwasser, MD
Edited by: Brittany Batell, MPH MSW
Patient Education by U-M Health is licensed under a Creative Commons AttributionNonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International Public License. Last revised 02/2024
• Change positions often, especially if you have an epidural (an injection of
medication that blocks pain during labor).
• Plan to have a support team (your partner, family member, doula, friend)
with you. Having ongoing labor support after your contractions get
stronger decreases the possibility of a Cesarean birth and improves your
labor and birth experience.
• Before you come to the hospital for your induction, learn about ways to
push effectively after the cervix is 10 cm dilated.
What can I eat and drink during an induction?
During an induction, you can eat food without animal protein or fat. Once you
get an epidural or once you’re in active labor, you can have clear liquids (like
water, apple or grape juice, gelatin, popsicles).
What does a scheduled induction look like?
On the day that your induction is scheduled, you should arrive at the Birth
Center at the time you are scheduled (unless you are contacted that day with
different instructions). Please note that we may have to delay your induction 1
day or more, depending on how busy it is in the Birth Center. We try to give you
as much advance notice as possible about delays.