Restriction of other means of suicide
Ease of access to certain means and substances used as methods of suicide are commonly associated with increased rates of suicides, and present key opportunities for prevention. These include restriction of gun ownership, pesticides, carbon monoxide gas, paracetamol, opioids, alcohol, and the modification of specific settings to reduce ease of hanging, and modifications to road networks outlined below.
Gun ownership is associated with increased rates of suicide overall, as well as death by suicide using a firearm (Jin, Khazem, & Anestis, 2016; Mann & Michel, 2016) and non- suicide related firearm mortality among children (Zeoli et al., 2019). Like other approaches to means restriction, reducing suicide deaths by firearms requires multiple strategies including the use of locked gun cabinets, storing guns unloaded, separate storage of guns and ammunition and outside of the USA, a focus on more stringent licencing. Changes to licencing in New Zealand after the 1990 Aramoana tragedy reduced firearm suicides, particularly among young people (Beautrais, Fergusson, & Horwood, 2006; Mann & Michel, 2016). Most firearms deaths in New Zealand occurring among older men, who have lower than average rates of GP contacts and antidepressant prescriptions in the year prior to their death (see the Suicide Mortality Review Committee report here for more detail). The impact of more recent firearms amendments following the 2019 Christchurch tragedy (Every- Palmer, Cunningham, Jenkins, & Bell, 2021) is not yet clear, but needs to be evaluated from a suicide prevention perspective.
Lethal means counselling usually focuses on firearms or medication advice and on parents taking care of a suicidal young person. Studies to date have focused on those presenting to Emergency Departments (ED’s) and have identified clinician hesitancy, perceived lack of skill and clinician sceptism about effectiveness as barriers to routine delivery of this approach to suicide prevention (Hunter et al., 2021).
Ingestion of pesticides is a method of suicide associated with a number of agricultural communities and in low and low middle income countries (LMIC) particularly in the Western Pacific region (Mew et al., 2017). Consideration of pesticide ingestion as a method of suicide is becoming more relevant to prevention in New Zealand as we become more diverse as a nation. The evidence to date suggests that national bans, rather than safe storage (Reifels et al., 2019) or sales restrictions (Gunnell et al., 2017) of the most highly hazardous pesticides (HHP) is the most effective method of reducing deaths both by suicide and overall, without impacting agricultural outputs (Bonvoisin, Utyasheva, Knipe, Gunnell, & Eddleston, 2020; Gunnell et al., 2017; Mew et al., 2017).
Means restriction to carbon monoxide gas has been the focus of a number of studies in the UK following changes in supply source for domestic gas (Sarchiapone, Mandelli, Iosue, Andrisano, & Roy, 2011). In New Zealand there has been a positive impact of regulations for catalytic convertors in motor vehicles (Suicide Mortality Review Committee, 2016), against a backdrop of reduced deaths (intentional and unintentional) due to carbon monoxide poisoning in Australasia (Long, Sun, Zhao, Liu, & Peng, 2021). Deaths by this method may further decline as the proportion of petrol vehicles in the fleet decreases over time.
Paracetamol is a cheap, widely available compound which is commonly used in intentional self-poisoning and is associated with morbidity and mortality. Paracetamol controls, reducing both the number of tablets available in a package, and number of packs that can be purchased at once have been effective in reducing deaths associated with this method in the UK (Hawton et al., 2013) and Ireland. However, both countries report ongoing issues with paracetamol overdoses and researchers recommend further reductions in availability such as making this a pharmacy only medication (Casey et al., 2020; Daly et al., 2021). Paracetamol control in Scotland had some initial success following the introduction of pack size controls, but then returned to previous levels (Gorman, Bain, Inglis, Murphy, & Bateman, 2007). A number of Australian states have moved to implement paracetamol control based on the international evidence (Lim, Buckley, Chitty, Moles, & Cairns, 2021). In addition to paracetamol, interventions to reduce access to salicylates, dextropropoxyphene, barbiturates, and caffeine tablets have also been found to effective across a number of countries (Lim et al., 2021).
Hanging has an extremely high case fatality rate and is the most common method of suicide among every population group in Aotearoa New Zealand, which makes this an important aspect of prevention to consider. In general population settings reducing access to ligatures and ligature points is not entirely feasible. However there is still scope for a reduction in deaths by this method in institutional settings such as hospitals, prisons and police custody using design for safety principles, ensuring adequate staffing and service user visibility (Jin et al., 2016; Sakinofsky, 2014). Internationally, certain common ligature points have been targeted for re-design to ensure they collapse under weight. There may be scope for this in New Zealand also, given that most deaths by hanging occur in the home. In addition, reducing unsafe reporting or social media content about this method is an important approach to reducing cognitive valence of this method (Cai, Junus, Chang, & Yip, 2022).
Alcohol consumption is associated with elevated risk of suicide, at both an individual and population level. Both acute intoxication and alcohol misuse are potential targets for intervention given their association with low mood, loss of behaviour regulation and hopelessness (Norstrom & Rossow, 2016). Reducing access to alcohol, and increasing price are feasible and effective strategies for reducing alcohol related harm generally, and for reducing suicide in particular (Altavini et al., 2022), particularly among men and younger people (Kolves et al., 2020). Reducing access has been shown to be effective in Europe and North America, including with indigenous populations (Leske et al., 2020). The clinical treatment literature relating to alcohol is addressed in a later section.
In terms of roading, New Zealand has a large road network, and each year there are transport- related suicides in which the deceased may be a driver or pedestrian. International evidence suggests that a proportion of transport accidents are suicides and suicide should be considered particularly in single vehicle accidents, for men 25 to 35 years and where the person has a prior experience of suicide attempt (Okolie et al., 2020a). There has been relatively little work in this area in New Zealand (Fortune, McDonald, Chafer, Lilley, & Mulder, 2022) and a recent review was unable to identify any intervention studies (Okolie et al., 2020a).
There has been extensive coverage in both the mainstream media and academic publications on the impact on opioid prescribing on opioid related deaths, particularly in the USA. Opioids are of interest to suicide prevention practitioners in New Zealand. First, we already have intentional self-poisoning deaths due to opioid compounds particularly among older men (Fortune et al., 2022). Secondly, there is a known overlap between accidental and intentional self-poisoning deaths internationally, and thirdly, there has been recent media coverage suggesting that compounds such as fentanyl are being distributed in the community (see here for more details). A full consideration of this topic is beyond the scope of this review; however, it is likely a strong prescription drug monitoring system (in terms of dose, duration and frequency), patient and clinician education, (Ansari, Tote, Rosenberg, & Martin, 2020) (e.g., Beaudoin, Banerjee, & Mello, 2016) in addition to harm reduction measures such as the availability of naloxone is likely to be needed. The evidence for the latter is; however, mixed (e.g., (Ansari et al., 2020)).