DISCONTINUANCE AND RECONNECTION
4.11 General:
Failure of SRP at any time to suspend the delivery of service, to terminate an Agreement 
for Electric Service, or to seek any other legal remedy upon default or breach by the 
Customer will not affect SRP’s right to seek any such remedies for the same or any future
default or breach by the Customer. If a Customer fails to perform as required by these 
Rules and Regulations, the Price Plans, the Electric Service Specifications, or the 
Customer’s Agreement for Electric Service, SRP may disconnect service. No personal
visit to a Customer’s premises is required prior to disconnection of service. SRP also 
may disconnect service to the Customer when necessary to comply with any law or 
regulation applicable to SRP or the Customer, or if a Governmental Entity revokes its 
clearance for the provision of electrical service.
4.12 Reconnect After Disconnect for Non-Payment:
4.12.1 Seven calendar days prior to disconnecting service for a delinquent SRP 
billing, SRP will mail, e-mail, or personally deliver to the Customer’s 
premises a written notice stating the delinquent amount and that SRP 
intends to disconnect service unless the delinquent amount is promptly paid.
This notification requirement does not apply to delinquent extensions for 
payment of prior billings when a seven-day notice was previously given, to
delinquent extensions for payment of deposits or other up-front charges that 
were billed as a courtesy to the Customer, to a pre-pay account when the 
Customer controls timing of the disconnection based on self-management 
of the pre-pay balance, or to insufficient funds regarding the Customer’s 
payment.
4.12.2 Once SRP disconnects service, SRP will not reconnect service until the 
Customer (a) applies for service; (b) pays all amounts the Customer owes 
SRP, including past-due bills and any charges for the cost of disconnecting 
and reconnecting service; and (c) corrects the condition that resulted in the 
SALT RIVER PROJECT AGRICULTURAL 
IMPROVEMENT AND POWER DISTRICT 
RULES AND REGULATIONS
29
disconnection. SRP may require an additional security deposit based on its 
evaluation of the Customer’s creditworthiness.
4.13 Disconnect and Reconnect Pursuant to a Request of a Governmental Entity:
4.13.1 If SRP receives a request to discontinue service from a Governmental Entity 
stating that it hasrevoked its clearance for the provision of electricalservice,
SRP may immediately disconnect service to the Customer without notice.
4.13.2 Once SRP disconnects service due to a request by a Governmental Entity, 
SRP will not reconnect service until it receives notice that the clearance for
the provision of electrical service has been restored by the Governmental 
Entity.
4.14 Fraud:
4.14.1 No Person shall connect a wire or contrivance to any apparatus used by SRP
to supply electricity to a Customer, nor shall any Person provide Power to 
any device by induction from SRP’s Lines, in such manner that the Person
takes electricity that is not properly metered or accounted for. No meter 
or other instrument installed for measuring the quantity of electricity 
consumed may be wrongfully obstructed, altered, injured, or prevented 
from functioning. When a meter seal has been broken by someone other 
than SRP’s personnel, SRP may assess a reconnection fee to the Customer’s 
billing. Bills for unmetered electricity may include the full cost or expense 
incurred by SRP to investigate and confirm diversion of electricity. SRP 
also reserves the right to impose additional charges, as it deems appropriate, 
when a provision of this Section 4.14.1 has been violated. Bills for all such 
charges are due and payable immediately upon presentation unless 
otherwise agreed by SRP. In addition to the remedies herein, SRP reserves 
all legal rights available to it including pursuing criminal prosecutions 
against, and criminal and civil damages from, any Party that violates this 
Section 4.14.1 or applicable law.
4.14.2 If SRP has evidence that any Customer has caused or allowed any of the
conditions of Section 4.14.1 to exist, SRP may, at any time, without notice, 
discontinue the supply of electricity to the Customer and remove the meter 
or meters, apparatus, wires, and Service Lateral, as well as any evidence of 
the condition.
4.14.3 SRP will charge the Customer for periods of unmetered service, estimated 
using data from available records and information. In the event of damage 
to meters or Service Equipment, the current Customer of record shall pay 
SRP based on estimated Energy usage not previously billed as well as any 
SRP costs associated with restoring proper metering or service.
SALT RIVER PROJECT AGRICULTURAL 
IMPROVEMENT AND POWER DISTRICT 
RULES AND REGULATIONS
30
4.14.4 If SRP disconnects service to the Customer because of a violation of these 
Rules and Regulations, SRP will not restore service to the Customer until 
all amounts due SRP have been paid. SRP will include the full cost or 
expense incurred by SRP for the removal and reinstallation of the meter or 
meters, apparatus, wires, and Service Lateral. The Customer’s service 
entrance must comply with SRP’s then-current Electric Service 
Specifications before it can be re-energized.
4.15 Other Reasons for Discontinuance:
4.15.1 SRP may terminate an Agreement for Electric Service with a Customer or 
suspend the delivery of service for any other default or breach of the 
Agreement by the Customer, but, except as expressly provided otherwise in 
these Rules and Regulations, SRP will not terminate or suspend service 
without first giving written notice to the Customer, stating in what particular 
way the Agreement has been violated.
4.15.2 SRP may terminate or suspend delivery of service in the event of a short 
circuit or other electrical system failure on the Customer’s side of the
Point of Delivery or, if the utilization of the service by the Customer, in 
SRP’s sole discretion, is a safety hazard or may cause damage to Persons 
or property (“Emergency Disconnect”). Notwithstanding any other 
provision of these Rules and Regulations, the Price Plans, the Electric 
Service Specifications, a Customer’s Agreement for Electric Service, or the 
Distributed Generation Interconnection Handbook, no advance notice need 
be given to the Customer in the event of an Emergency Disconnect.
4.15.3 Upon prior written notice, SRP may terminate or suspend the delivery of 
service if: (a) the Customer refuses to grant or is unable to procure 
easements necessary for or incidental to SRP’s facilities or its provision of 
service to the Customer according to Section 5.1.5 or any written agreement 
between SRP and the Customer, or (b) SRP is not provided proper access 
to SRP Lines, Service Laterals, meters, or other equipment located on 
property owned or controlled by the Customer to perform maintenance or 
repair of SRP facilities, to provide service to the Customer, or to read meters 
on the Customer’s premises.
4.15.4 Notwithstanding any other provision of these Rules and Regulations, the 
Price Plans, the Electric Service Specifications, or the Customer’s 
Agreement for Electric Service or the Distributed Generation 
Interconnection Handbook, SRP may disconnect a Customer at any time, 
without notice, and remove the meter or meters if the Customer has 
misrepresented his or her identity in any manner.
SALT RIVER PROJECT AGRICULTURAL 
IMPROVEMENT AND POWER DISTRICT 
RULES AND REGULATIONS
31
4.15.5 Upon prior written notice to Customer, SRP may terminate or suspend the 
delivery of electric service to any Customer who: (a) without obtaining 
SRP’s prior written approval, connects or allows the connection of a 
Distributed Energy Device to any portion of such Customer’s electric 
system; (b) is required to sign SRP’s Interconnection Agreement but refuses 
to do so; (c) fails to procure the signature of a third-party owner or operator
on SRP’s Interconnection Agreement; or (d) fails to comply with the
SRP’s Distributed Generation Interconnection Handbook.
4.15.6 SRP may terminate or suspend delivery of electric service at any time, 
without notice, if a Customer’s identity cannot be established to SRP’s 
satisfaction