Should I Switch to Xylitol Toothpaste?
 Dental benefits
 Xylitol toothpaste
 Vs. fluoride
 In children
 Gum and candy
 Daily intake
 Side effects
 FAQ
 Takeaway
 Some research suggests that xylitol toothpaste may benefit your teeth, such as preventing cavities. However, research is mixed. More studies are needed to fully support its dental health benefits.
 

 Xylitol is a sugar alcohol. Although it occursTrusted Source naturally in some fruits, it’s considered an artificial sweetener.
 

 Some research suggests that xylitol may have several dental benefits.
 

 However, the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) doesn’t support using xylitol toothpaste because there isn’t enough research on its effectiveness for dental health, and the current research is mixed.
 

 Keep reading to learn more about the possible dental health benefits and side effects of xylitol toothpaste, as well as how to use it.
 

 Xylitol and dental health benefits
 Xylitol may be an effective defenseTrusted Source against the bacteria Streptococcus mutans (S. mutans). This type of cariogenic, or cavity-causing, bacteria is a key contributor to tooth decay and enamel breakdown.
 

 Sugar serves as food for the cariogenic bacteria that live in your mouth. When those bacteria feed on fermentable sugars, they produce lactic acid that damages tooth enamel. This damage can eventually lead to cavities.
 

 Xylitol is an unfermentable sugar alcohol that the bacteria can’t process. That means no lactic acid is produced to damage the enamel.
 

 Xylitol may also help prevent dental plaque, which may lead to cavities.
 

 Benefits of xylitol toothpaste
 Several studies have found that xylitol toothpaste may be an effective delivery system for xylitol. However, the research is mixed on how much xylitol is needed to experience notable benefits.
 

 For instance, a 2023 study found that using 25% xylitol toothpaste twice daily for 24 months significantly reduced levels of S. mutans in the mouth. The researchers concluded that xylitol toothpaste may be an effective home remedy for preventing cavities.
 

 A 2024 studyTrusted Source found similar results when using 25% xylitol toothpaste twice daily for 3 months, while a 2022 reviewTrusted Source found that products containing xylitol, such as chewing gum and toothpaste, helped prevent cavities.
 

 On the other hand, the AAPD found that taking xylitol less than three times daily had no protective effects, which differs from the positive results above.
 

 However, the AAPD did note that consuming 5 to 10 grams (g) of xylitol three times daily may help reduce cavities by up to 80%.
 

 ADVERTISEMENT
 Compare Medicare Advantage Plans
 See a list of Medicare Advantage plans in your area that may be suited to your unique needs with HelloMedicare™.
 

 We offer Medicare Advantage plans in All 50 States
 Multiple Insurance Carriers Available
 Compare Plans
 Medicare Costs Defined
 Xylitol toothpaste vs. fluoride toothpaste
 Research comparing xylitol toothpaste and fluoride toothpaste is limited.
 

 A small 2018 studyTrusted Source found that fluoride toothpaste was more effective at reducing S. mutans than xylitol toothpaste.
 

 Some xylitol proponents suggest that it’s more effective when combined with fluoride in toothpaste. Xylitol helps protect the teeth from damage, and fluoride helps repair any damage that the teeth might sustain.
 

 A 2015 reviewTrusted Source of 10 studies compared fluoride toothpaste to fluoride toothpaste with 10% xylitol added.
 

 When children used xylitol-fluoride toothpaste for 2.5 to 3 years, their cavities were reduced by an additional 13%. That said, the evidence was deemed to be of low quality.
 

 However, a 2014 studyTrusted Source found no significant difference in tooth decay reduction between children using xylitol-fluoride toothpaste and those using fluoride-only toothpaste.
 

 More research is needed to compare the effects of fluoride and xylitol toothpaste.
 

 Xylitol toothpaste for children
 Some studies have found that xylitol toothpaste may be an effective strategy for reducing cavities in kids.
 

 The AAPD has endorsed xylitol as part of a complete strategy to prevent tooth decay or cavities. However, due to mixed and limited research, the AAPD doesn’t recommend using xylitol toothpaste for children.
 

 Xylitol chewing gum and candy
 According to the AAPD, some research has found that chewing may enhance xylitol’s anti-cariogenic, or anti-tooth decay, effect.
 

 This means that chewing gum, lozenges, and candies may be more effective at preventing cavities than toothpaste.
 

 A 2014 study also found that erythritol candy was significantly more effective at reducing cavities than xylitol candy.
 

 However, more research is needed.
 

 How much xylitol you need
 The research on how much xylitol you need per day is mixed.
 

 For instance, a 2014 review suggests that a daily dose of 6 to 10 gTrusted Source could help prevent carries.
 

 However, the AAPD notes that three daily doses of 5 to 10 g, for a daily total of 15 to 30 g, are needed to experience dental benefits.
 

 Side effects of xylitol
 Xylitol is digested slowly in the large intestine. This may result in its primary side effects, which may include:
 

 flatulence
 diarrhea
 more frequent bowel movements
 It’s also important to note that xylitol is especially toxic to dogs. If your dog eats xylitol toothpaste — or xylitol in any form — take them to the veterinarian immediately.
 

 Make sure to bring along the packaging from the xylitol product for the vet’s reference.
 

 Frequently asked questions
 Is xylitol toothpaste good for your teeth?
 Some research suggests xylitol toothpaste could help reduce plaque buildup and bacteria that may lead to cavities. However, more research is needed.
 

 Is there xylitol in Crest toothpaste?
 Some types of Crest toothpaste may have xylitol, such as Crest 3D white. However, if you want xylitol in your toothpaste, it’s best to read the labels because not all toothpaste contains xylitol.
 

 

 The bottom line
 Xylitol is a sugar replacement that could help prevent cavities and tooth decay. Some research suggests that xylitol toothpaste may have a significant impact on cavity prevention.
 

 However, toothpaste may not be the most effective delivery system for xylitol.
 

 If you’re considering switching to a toothpaste with xylitol, speak with a dentist first. They could help you decide whether it’s right for you and provide suggestions to help you prevent cavities.
 

 This may include modifying your oral hygiene routine and recommending regular visits to the dentist.