After the 1973 Act, in fulfilling the objective of controlling pollution, each Water
Authority had created a water quality advisory panel to monitor its
performance in meeting water quality requirements. The objective of the
advisory panels was to achieve some independence between the water
authority’s functions of public supply, pollution control and monitoring of
environmental performance.
In a move to address the problem of poor surface water quality, the National
Water Council published a classification of river quality objectives in 1977.
The classification system related to the purposes for which water was to be
used based on five basic classes of river waters:
1A High quality waters suitable for all abstraction purposes with only modest
treatment. Capable of supporting high class fisheries. High amenity
value.
1B Good quality waters usable for substantially the same purposes as 1A
though not as high quality.
2 Fair quality waters viable as coarse (freshwater) fisheries and capable of
use for drinking water provided advanced treatment is given. Moderate
amenity value.
3 Poor waters polluted to the extent that fish were absent or only
sporadically present. Suitable only for low grade industrial abstractions.
4 Bad quality waters which were grossly polluted and likely to cause a
nuisance.
This classification was adopted by each water authority in setting informal
river quality objectives and to define the permits for treated sewage
discharges.
The suitability of this classification system was later questioned as it
introduced the concept of high river quality being a lower priority unless
specific uses compel it. With significant scope for discretion in the setting of
standards by the water authorities and no imposed national standards, it
ultimately led to a review of the number of discharge permits, which led to a
relaxation of their requirements36. It further masked the problems of declining
water quality and was clearly insufficient to satisfy EC law.

With little political acceptance of the dramatic increases required to customer
bills to address the problems of under-investment and declining infrastructure,
the government continued to delay implementation of the condition from the
1974 Act that required the water authorities to publish pollution registers
against the performance of discharge permits. This was contrary to the
openness required once the authorities were given the conflicting roles of
sewage works operators and river quality regulators37, conflicted with the
water authorities’ role to prevent pollution and led the water quality advisory
panels to be largely ineffective. With the water authorities unwilling to selfregulate and self-prosecute there was a sharp increase in the number of
incidents of river pollution38. Lack of public access to information on
discharge permits and pollution incidents further compounded the problem.
3.4 WATER ACT 1983
In response to the problems created by the increasing capital investment
requirements of the water authorities and the requirement to address the
problems of environmental pollution, the government introduced the Water Act
1983. The assumption underlying the 1983 Act was that water customers
were best served by an efficiently run water utility providing prescribed service
standards at least cost.
The 1983 Act changed the organisational structure of the water authorities,
reduced the role of local government, and, by allowing companies to operate
in a more commercial manner, paved the way for privatisation.
3.4.1 Constitutional changes
Until 1983, the water authorities were run by large boards with a majority of
local authority representatives (see section 3.1.4). The 1983 Act reduced the
size of the board structures with the intention of making these smaller and
more business like by reducing the number of representatives from local
authorities. Although all members continued to be appointed by central
government, a series of chairmen vacancies were filled by people with
experience in the industry rather than experience of public affairs.

The 1983 Act provided for Consumer Consultative Committees to represent
the interests of customers following the abolishment of locally elected
councillors as water authority members, and as a result of restrictions in
public access to management meetings of the authorities.