Drugs and Biologics
Aside from Schedule I substances, controlled substances have accepted medical uses and may be lawfully
dispensed by prescription under the CSA, subject to various restrictions. Accordingly, rescheduling
marijuana from Schedule I to Schedule III would open the door for the medical marijuana industry to
market their products consistent with federal law. Any such products must still comply with other federal
legal requirements, such as the FD&C Act, before they could be legally marketed in the United States.
Rescheduling thus would not automatically legalize medical marijuana in the United States.
The FD&C Act requires new drugs, including both small-molecule drugs that are synthesized in a
laboratory and biologics that are derived from living organisms (e.g., vaccines), to be approved by FDA
before they can be marketed and sold in the United States. For FDA to approve a new drug, the drug
sponsor must submit a new drug application (NDA) with “substantial evidence” that the drug is safe and
effective for its proposed use. Similarly, for FDA to approve a biologic, a sponsor must submit a biologics
license application (BLA) demonstrating that the product is safe, potent, and pure. Certain chemicals
related to or derived from marijuana may be considered small-molecule drugs, while other components of
the cannabis plant—including marijuana itself—may be considered a biologic.
Congressional Research Service 3
Marijuana itself is not an approved drug, but FDA has approved four drugs derived from or related to
cannabis. FDA approved a drug containing CBD called Epidiolex, which is used to treat certain kinds of
seizures. FDA also approved Marinol and Syndros for the treatment of anorexia associated with weight
loss in AIDS patients, as well as Cesamet for the treatment of nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing
chemotherapy. Marinol and Syndros contain the active ingredient dronabinol, a synthetic delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which is considered the psychoactive component of cannabis. Cesamet
contains the active ingredient nabilone, which is synthetically derived and has a chemical structure similar
to THC. Despite obtaining FDA approval, Epidiolex, Marinol, Syndros, and Cesamet could not
immediately be marketed in the United States because CBD and synthetic tetrahydrocannabinols were
considered Schedule I substances. The DOJ rescheduled each of these drugs within a few months to a
couple years of their approval by FDA, thereby allowing the drugs to be marketed and prescribed. The
DOJ rescheduled Epidiolex as a Schedule V drug, and the 2018 farm bill completely descheduled
Epidiolex because it is considered hemp under the new definition. FDA-approved products containing
dronabinol were rescheduled to Schedule II or Schedule III under the CSA, depending on their form, and
FDA-approved products containing nabilone were rescheduled to Schedule II. Other
tetrahydrocannabinols remain Schedule I substances, and, because they are scheduled separately from
marijuana, they are not included in the DOJ’s proposed rule rescheduling marijuana.
Drugs Marketed Without FDA Approval
New drugs that FDA has not approved cannot legally be marketed in interstate commerce under the
FD&C Act. FDA categorizes products based on how they are marketed rather than based on how the
manufacturer or seller categorizes them. FDA may therefore consider some products marketed as a food,
dietary supplement, tobacco product, or cosmetic to be illegal drugs (assuming they have not obtained
FDA approval for marketing as a drug) if the product’s packaging makes claims that it is intended to cure,
mitigate, or treat a disease or health-related condition. The FD&C Act defines a “drug” to include
“articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease.”
Therefore, FDA may deem products to be “drugs” under this definition if they are marketed as a treatment
for a disease. FDA has issued warning letters to companies marketing cannabis products, including CBD
tea and hemp-infused body butter, whose labeling makes these kinds of treatment claims, advising that
drugs must undergo the NDA process before they can be marketed in interstate commerce. A
manufacturer or seller of one of these products can remedy the issue by submitting an NDA and obtaining
FDA approval to market its product as a drug, or by removing the claims.
Medical Research
To obtain approval for a new drug or biologic, sponsors must conduct research, including clinical trials on
human subjects, to generate the required evidence regarding the drug’s safety and effectiveness. Before
conducting research with marijuana, a researcher must obtain a DEA registration and an FDA
authorization of an investigational new drug application (IND) containing details on how the researcher
plans to conduct the study. Then, the researcher must use marijuana from a DEA-registered source.
Generally, rescheduling a drug from Schedule I to Schedule III loosens the controls on medical research
involving that drug. Researchers and manufacturers of Schedule III substances are subject to less-onerous
registration requirements than researchers and manufacturers of Schedule I substances. However, medical
researchers and drug sponsors of marijuana or CBD containing drugs would not benefit from these looser
restrictions associated with rescheduling without congressional action. In 2022, Congress passed the
Medical Marijuana and Cannabidiol Research Expansion Act (P.L. 117-215), which amended the CSA for
medical research involving marijuana or CBD to lessen the stringent controls typically applicable for
Schedule I substances. The act created separate requirements for marijuana researchers and manufacturers
Congressional Research Service 4
to expedite registration with the DEA, and these separate requirements would not be affected by
rescheduling without additional congressional action.
