Recent advances in generative AI systems, which are trained on large volumes of data to generate new
content that may mimic likenesses, voices, or other aspects of real people’s identities, have stimulated
congressional interest. Like the above-noted uses of AI to imitate Tom Hanks and George Carlin, the
examples below illustrate that some AI uses raise concerns under both ROP laws and myriad other laws.
One example of AI’s capability to imitate voices was an AI-generated song called “Heart on My Sleeve,”
which sounded like it was sung by the artist Drake and was heard by millions of listeners in 2023.
Simulating an artist’s voice in this manner could make one liable under ROP laws, although these laws
Congressional Research Service 4
differ as to whether they cover voice imitations or vocal styles as opposed to the artist’s actual voice.
Voice imitations are not, however, prohibited by copyright laws. For example, the alleged copyright
violation that caused YouTube to remove “Heart on My Sleeve”—namely, that it sampled another
recording without permission—was unrelated to the Drake voice imitation. In August 2023, Google and
Universal Music were in discussions to license artists’ melodies and voices for AI-generated songs.
The potential for AI to replicate both voices and likenesses was also a point of contention in last year’s
negotiations for a collective bargaining agreement between the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation
of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)—a union that represents movie, television, and radio
actors—and television and movie studios, including streaming services. SAG-AFTRA expressed concern
that AI could be used to alter or replace actors’ performances without their permission, such as by using
real film recordings to train AI to create “digital replicas” of actors and voice actors. The Memorandum of
Agreement between SAG-AFTRA and studios approved in December 2023 requires studios to obtain
“clear and conspicuous” consent from an actor or background actor to create or use a digital replica of the
actor or to digitally alter the actor’s performance, with certain exceptions. It also requires that the actor’s
consent for use of a digital replica or digital alterations be based on a “reasonably specific description” of
the intended use or alteration. The agreement provides that consent continues after the actor’s death
unless “explicitly limited,” while consent for additional postmortem uses must be obtained from the
actor’s authorized representative or—if a representative cannot be identified or located—from the union.
In January 2024, SAG-AFTRA announced it had also reached an agreement with a voice technology
company regarding voice replicas for video games, while a negotiation to update SAG-AFTRA’s
agreement with video game publishers is reportedly ongoing.
Commentators have also raised concern with deceptive AI-generated or AI-altered content known as
“deepfakes,” including some videos with sexually explicit content and others meant to denigrate public
officials. To the extent this content includes real people’s NIL and is used commercially, ROP laws might
provide a remedy. Where deepfakes are used to promote products or services—such as the AI replica of
Tom Hanks used in a dental plan ad—they may also constitute false endorsement under the Lanham Act.
In addition to these laws, some states have enacted laws prohibiting sexually explicit deepfakes, with
California and New York giving victims a civil claim and Georgia and Virginia imposing criminal
liability. In addition, Section 1309 of the federal Violence Against Women Act Reauthorization Act of
2022 (VAWA 2022) provides a civil claim for nonconsensual disclosure of “intimate visual depictions,”
which might be interpreted to prohibit intimate deepfakes—as might some states’ “revenge porn” laws. A
bill introduced in the House of Representatives in May 2023, the Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate
Images Act, H.R. 3106, would amend VAWA 2022 by creating a separate civil claim for disclosing certain
“intimate digital depictions” without the written consent of the depicted individual, as well as providing
criminal liability for certain actual or threatened disclosures. Deepfakes may also give rise to liability
under state defamation laws where a party uses them to communicate reputation-damaging falsehoods
about a person with a requisite degree of fault.
Regarding the use of AI in political advertisements, some proposed legislation would prohibit deepfakes
or require disclaimers for them in federal campaigns, although such proposals may raise First Amendment
concerns. The Protect Elections from Deceptive AI Act, S. 2770 (118th Cong.), for instance, would ban
the use of AI to generate materially deceptive content falsely depicting federal candidates in political ads
to influence federal elections, while excluding news, commentary, satires, and parodies from liability.
Google announced that, as of mid-November 2023, verified election advertisers on its platform “must
prominently disclose when their ads contain synthetic content that inauthentically depicts real or realisticlooking people or events.”
Another concern some commentators raise is that AI-generated material might be falsely attributed to real
persons without their permission. One writer who focuses on the publishing industry, for instance, found
that books apparently generated by AI were being sold under her name on Amazon. Although the
Congressional Research Service 5
company ultimately removed these titles, the writer claimed that her “initial infringement claim with
Amazon went nowhere,” since her name was not trademarked and the books did not infringe existing
copyrights. As she noted, however, this scenario might give rise to claims under state ROP laws as well as
the Lanham Act. In addition, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) states that “books sold as if authored
by humans but in fact reflecting the output of [AI]” violate the FTC Act and may result in civil fines.
It is unclear how Section 230 of the Communications Act of 1934 might apply when ROP-infringing
content from a third party, including content made with AI, is disseminated through social media and
other interactive computer services. Although the law generally bars any lawsuits that would hold online
service providers and users liable for third party content, there is an exception allowing lawsuits under
“any law pertaining to intellectual property.” Courts differ as to whether state ROP laws and the Lanham
Act’s prohibition on false endorsement are laws “pertaining to” IP within the meaning of Section 230.
Another Legal Sidebar discusses the application of Section 230 to generative AI more broadly.
Considerations for Congress
Some commentators have called for federal ROP legislation to provide more uniform and predictable
protection for the ROP in the United States. Others have argued that Congress should leave ROP
protection to the states on federalism grounds. If Congress decides to craft federal ROP legislation, it
might consider the scope of the ROP protections it seeks to enact, the effect of those enactments on state
ROP laws, and constitutional authorities and limitations on Congress’s power to enact ROP protections.
As noted below, some Members have proposed legislation that would prohibit certain unauthorized uses
of digital replicas or depictions of individuals while leaving state ROP laws in place. 