Y O U R G U I D E T O
Healthy Sleep

Y o u r G u i d e t o
Healthy Sleep
NIH Publication No. 11-5271
Originally printed November 2005
Revised August 2011

Contents
Introduction 1
What Is Sleep? 4
What Makes You Sleep? 7
What Does Sleep Do for You? 12
Your Learning, Memory, and Mood 12
Your Heart 13
Your Hormones 14
How Much Sleep Is Enough? 19
What Disrupts Sleep? 25
Is Snoring a Problem? 30
Common Sleep Disorders 33
Insomnia 35
Sleep Apnea 38
Restless Legs Syndrome 47
Narcolepsy 48
Parasomnias (Abnormal Arousals) 51
Do You Think You Have a Sleep Disorder? 53
How To Find a Sleep Center and Sleep Specialist 56
Research 57
For More Sleep Information 60
Contents

1
Introduction
Think of your daily activities. Which activity is so important you
should devote one-third of your time to doing it? Probably the first
things that come to mind are working, spending time with your
family, or doing leisure activities. But there’s something else you
should be doing about one-third of your time—sleeping.
Many people view sleep as merely a “down time” when their brains
shut off and their bodies rest. People may cut back on sleep, think
ing it won’t be a problem, because other responsibilities seem much
more important. But research shows that a number of vital tasks
carried out during sleep help people stay healthy and function at
their best.
While you sleep, your brain is hard at work forming the pathways
necessary for learning and creating memories and new insights.
Without enough sleep, you can’t focus and pay attention or respond
quickly. A lack of sleep may even cause
mood problems. Also, growing
evidence shows that a chronic
lack of sleep increases your risk
of obesity, diabetes, cardiovas
cular disease, and infections.
Introduction
2Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
Despite growing support for the idea that adequate sleep, like
adequate nutrition and physical activity, is vital to our well-being,
people are sleeping less. The nonstop “24/7” nature of the world
today encourages longer or nighttime work hours and offers
continual access to entertainment and other activities. To keep up,
people cut back on sleep.
A common myth is that people can learn to get by on little sleep
(such as less than 6 hours a night) with no adverse effects. Research
suggests, however, that adults need at least 7–8 hours of sleep each
night to be well rested. Indeed, in 1910, most people slept 9 hours a
night. But recent surveys show the average adult now sleeps fewer
than 7 hours a night. More than one-third of adults report daytime
sleepiness so severe that it interferes with work, driving, and social
functioning at least a few days each month.
Evidence also shows that children’s and adolescents’ sleep is shorter
than recommended. These trends have been linked to increased
exposure to electronic media. Lack of sleep may have a direct effect
on children’s health, behavior, and development.
Chronic sleep loss or sleep disorders may
affect as many as 70 million Americans.
This may result in an annual cost of
$16 billion in health care
expenses and $50 billion in
lost productivity.
3
What happens when you don’t get enough sleep? Can you make up
for lost sleep during the week by sleeping more on the weekends?
How does sleep change as you become older? Is snoring a problem?
How can you tell if you have a sleep disorder? Read on to find the
answers to these questions and to better understand what sleep is
and why it is so necessary. Learn about common sleep myths and
practical tips for getting enough sleep, coping with jet lag and
nighttime shift work, and avoiding dangerous drowsy driving.
Many common sleep disorders go unrecognized and thus are not
Introduction
treated. This booklet also gives the latest information on sleep
disorders such as insomnia (trouble falling or
staying asleep), sleep apnea (pauses in
breathing during sleep), restless legs
syndrome, narcolepsy (extreme daytime
sleepiness), and parasomnias (abnormal
sleep behaviors).It’s important to tell your
doctor what you are
experiencing, so you can
help your doctor diagnose
your condition.
S Z E - P I N G
“
”
4Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
What Is Sleep?
Sleep was long considered just a block of time when your brain and
body shut down. Thanks to sleep research studies done over the
past several decades, it is now known that sleep has distinct stages
that cycle throughout the night in predictable patterns. How well
rested you are and how well you function depend
not just on your total sleep time but on how much
sleep you get each night and the timing of your
sleep stages.
Your brain and body functions stay active through
out sleep, and each stage of sleep is linked to a
specific type of brain waves (distinctive
patterns of electrical activity in the brain).
Sleep is divided into two basic types:
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and
non-REM sleep (with three different
stages). (For more information, see
“Types of Sleep” on page 5.) Typically,
sleep begins with non-REM sleep. In
stage 1 non-REM sleep, you sleep lightly
and can be awakened easily by noises or
other disturbances. During this first stage
of sleep, your eyes move slowly, your
muscles relax, and your heart and breath
ing rates begin to slow. You then enter
stage 2 non-REM sleep, which is defined
by slower brain waves with occasional
bursts of rapid waves. You spend about
half the night in this stage.
When you progress into stage 3 non-
REM sleep, your brain waves become
even slower, and the brain produces
extremely slow waves almost exclusively
(called Delta waves).
5
l
l
l
l
l
Stage 3 is a very deep stage of sleep, during which it is very difficult
to be awakened. Children who wet the bed or sleep walk tend to do
so during stage 3 of non-REM sleep. Deep sleep is considered the
“restorative” stage of sleep that is necessary for feeling well rested
and energetic during the day.
Types of
Sleep
Non-REM Sleep REM Sleep
Stage 1: Light sleep; easily
awakened; muscles
relax with occasional
twitches; eye
movements are slow.
Stage 2: Eye movements stop;
slower brain waves,
with occasional bursts
of rapid brain waves.
Stage 3: Occurs soon after you
fall asleep and mostly
in the first half of the
night. Deep sleep;
difficult to awaken;
large slow brain
waves, heart and
respiratory rates are
slow and muscles are
relaxed.
Usually first occurs
about 90 minutes
after you fall asleep,
and longer, deeper
periods occur during
the second half of the
night; cycles along with
the non-REM stages
throughout the night.
Eyes move rapidly
behind closed eyelids.
Breathing, heart rate,
and blood pressure are
irregular.
Dreaming occurs.
Arm and leg muscles
are temporarily
paralyzed.
Types of Sleep
During REM sleep, your eyes move rapidly in different directions, even
though your eyelids stay closed. Your breathing also becomes more
rapid, irregular, and shallow, and your heart rate and blood pressure
increase. Dreaming typically occurs during REM sleep. During this
type of sleep, your arm and leg muscles are temporarily paralyzed so
that you cannot “act out” any dreams that you may be having.
What Is Sleep?
6Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
You typically first enter REM sleep about an hour to an hour and a
half after falling asleep. After that, the sleep stages repeat them
selves continuously while you sleep. As you sleep, REM sleep time
becomes longer, while time spent in stage 3 non-REM sleep becomes
shorter. By the time you wake up, nearly all your sleep time has
been spent in stages 1 and 2 of non-REM sleep and in REM sleep.
If REM sleep is severely disrupted during one night, REM sleep time
is typically longer than normal in subsequent nights until you catch
up. Overall, almost one-half of your total sleep time is spent in
stage 2 non-REM sleep and about one-fifth each in deep sleep (stage 3
of non-REM sleep) and REM sleep. In contrast, infants spend half
or more of their total sleep time in REM sleep. Gradually, as they
grow, the percentage of total sleep time they spend in REM contin
ues to decrease, until it reaches the one-fifth level typical of later
childhood and adulthood.
Why people dream and why REM sleep is so important are not well
understood. It is known that REM sleep stimulates the brain
regions you use to learn and make memories. Animal studies
suggest that dreams may reflect the brain’s sorting and selectively
storing new information acquired during wake time. While this
information is processed, the brain might revisit scenes from the day
and mix them randomly. Dreams are generally recalled when we
wake briefly or are awakened by an alarm clock or some other noise
in the environment. Studies show, however, that other stages of
sleep besides REM also are needed to form the pathways in the
brain that enable us to learn and remember.
7
What Makes You Sleep?
Although you may put off going to sleep in order to squeeze more
activities into your day, eventually your need for sleep becomes
overwhelming. This need appears to be due, in part, to two sub
stances your body produces. One substance, called adenosine,
builds up in your blood while you’re awake. Then, while you sleep,
your body breaks down the adenosine. Levels of this substance in
your body may help trigger sleep when needed.
A buildup of adenosine and many other complex factors might
explain why, after several nights of less than optimal amounts of
sleep, you build up a sleep debt. This may cause you to sleep longer
than normal or at unplanned times during the day. Because of your
body’s internal processes, you can’t adapt to getting less sleep than
your body needs. Eventually, a lack of sleep catches up with you.
The other substance that helps make you sleep is a hormone called
melatonin. This hormone makes you naturally feel sleepy at night.
It is part of your internal “biological clock,” which controls when
you feel sleepy and your sleep patterns. Your biological clock is a
small bundle of cells in your brain that works throughout the day
and night. Internal and external environmental cues, such as light
signals received through your eyes, control these cells. Your biologi
cal clock triggers your body to produce melatonin, which helps
prepare your brain and body for sleep. As melatonin is released,
you’ll feel increasingly drowsy. Because of your biological clock,
you naturally feel the most tired between midnight and 7 a.m. You
also may feel mildly sleepy in the afternoon between 1 p.m. and
4 p.m. when another increase in melatonin occurs in your body.
Your biological clock makes you the most alert during daylight
hours and the least alert during the early morning hours. Conse
quently, most people do their best work during the day. Our 24/7
society, however, demands that some people work at night. Nearly
one-quarter of all workers work shifts that are not during the
daytime, and more than two-thirds of these workers have problem
sleepiness and/or difficulty sleeping. Because their work schedules
What Makes You Sleep?
8Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
are at odds with powerful sleep-regulating cues like sunlight, night
shift workers often find themselves drowsy at work, and they have
difficulty falling or staying asleep during the daylight hours when
their work schedules require them to sleep.
The fatigue experienced by night shift workers can be dangerous.
Major industrial accidents—such as the Three Mile Island and
Chernobyl nuclear power plant accidents and the Exxon Valdez oil
spill—have been caused, in part, by mistakes made by overly tired
workers on the night shift or an extended shift.
Night shift workers also are at greater risk of being in car crashes
when they drive home from work during the early morning hours,
because the biological clock is not sending out an alerting signal.
One study found that one-fifth of night shift workers had a car crash
or a near miss in the preceding year because of sleepiness on the
drive home from work. Night shift workers are also more likely to
have physical problems, such as heart disease, digestive troubles, and
infertility, as well as emotional problems. All of these problems may
be related, at least in part, to the workers’ chronic sleepiness, possi
bly because their biological clocks are not in tune with their work
schedules. See “Working the Night Shift” on page 9 for some
helpful tips if you work a night shift.
Other factors also can influence your need for sleep, including your
immune system’s production of hormones called cytokines. Cyto
kines are made to help the immune system fight certain infections or
chronic inflammation and may prompt you to sleep more than
usual. The extra sleep may help you conserve the resources needed
to fight the infection. Recent
studies confirm that being well
rested improves the body’s
responses to infection.
People are creatures of
habit, and one of the
hardest habits to break is
the natural wake and
sleep cycle. Together, a
number of physiological
factors help you sleep
and wake up at the
same times each day.
9
Consequently, you may have a hard time adjusting when you travel
across time zones. The light cues outside and the clocks in your new
location may tell you it is 8 a.m. and you should be active, but your
body is telling you it is more like 4 a.m. and you should sleep. The
end result is jet lag—sleepiness during the day, difficulty falling or
staying asleep at night, poor concentration, confusion, nausea, and
generally feeling unwell and irritable. See “Dealing With Jet Lag” on
page 10.
Working the
Night Shift
Try to limit night shift work, if that is possible. If you must work
the night shift, the following tips may help you:
l
l
l
l
l
Increase your total amount of sleep by adding naps and
lengthening the amount of time you allot for sleep.
Use bright lights in your workplace.
Minimize the number of shift changes so that your body’s
biological clock has a longer time to adjust to a nighttime
work schedule.
Get rid of sound and light distractions in your bedroom
during your daytime sleep.
Use caffeine only during the first part of your shift to
promote alertness at night.
If you are unable to fall asleep during the day, and all else fails,
talk with your doctor to see whether it would be wise for you
to use prescribed, short-acting sleeping pills to help you sleep
during the day.
Night Shift
What Makes You Sleep?
10Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
Dealing With
Jet Lag
Be aware that adjusting to a new time zone may take several
days. If you are going to be away for just a few days, it may be
better to stick to your original sleep and wake times as much as
possible, rather than adjusting your biological clock too many
times in rapid succession.
Eastward travel generally causes more severe jet lag than
westward travel because traveling east requires you to shorten
the day, and your biological clock is better able to adjust to a
longer day than a shorter day. Fortunately for globetrotters, a
few preventive measures and adjustments seem to help some
people relieve jet lag, particularly when they are going to spend
more than a few days at their destination:
l
l
Adjust your biological clock. During the 2–3 days prior to a
long trip, get adequate sleep. You can make minor changes
to your sleep schedule. For example, if you are traveling
west, delay your bed time and wake time progressively by
20- to 30-minute intervals. If you are traveling east, advance
your wake time by 10 to 15 minutes a day for a few days and
try to advance your bed time. Decreasing light exposure
at bedtime and increasing light exposure at wake time can
help you make these adjustments. When you arrive at your
destination, spend a lot of time outdoors so your body gets
the light cues it needs to adjust to the new time zone. Take
a couple of short 10–15 minute catnaps if you feel tired, but
do not take long naps during the day.
Avoid alcohol and caffeine. Although it may be tempting
to drink alcohol to relieve the stress of travel and make it
easier to fall asleep, you’re more likely to sleep lighter and
wake up in the middle of the night when the effects of the
alcohol wear off. Caffeine can help keep you awake longer,
but caffeine also can make it harder for you to fall asleep if
its effects haven’t worn off by the time you are ready to go
to bed. Therefore, it’s best to use caffeine only during the
morning and not during the afternoon.
11
l What about melatonin? Your body produces this hormone
that may cause some drowsiness and cues the brain and
body that it is time to fall asleep. Melatonin builds up in your
body during the early evening and into the first 2 hours of
your sleep period, and then its release stops in the middle of
the night.
Melatonin is available as an over-the-counter supplement.
Because melatonin is considered safe when used over a
period of days or weeks and seems to help people feel
sleepy, it has been suggested as a treatment for jet lag. But
melatonin’s effectiveness is controversial, and its safety
when used over a prolonged period is unclear. Some studies
find that taking melatonin supplements before bedtime for
several days after arrival in a new time zone can make it
easier to fall asleep at the proper time. Other studies find
that melatonin does not help relieve jet lag.
What Makes You Sleep?
Jet Lag
12Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
What Does Sleep Do
for You?
A number of aspects of your health and quality of life are linked to
sleep, and these aspects are impaired when you are sleep deprived.
Your Learning, Memory, and Mood
Students who have trouble grasping new information or learning
new skills are often advised to “sleep on it,” and that advice seems
well founded. Recent studies reveal that people can learn a task
better if they are well rested. They also can better remember what
they learned if they get a good night’s sleep after learning the task
than if they are sleep deprived. Study volunteers had to sleep at
least 6 hours to show improvement in learning. Additionally, the
amount of improvement was directly related to how much time they
slept—for example, volunteers who slept 8 hours outperformed
those who slept only 6 or 7 hours. Other studies suggest that it’s
important to get enough rest the night before a mentally challenging
task, rather than only sleeping for a short period or waiting to sleep
until after the task is complete.
Many well-known artists and scientists claim to have had creative
insights while they slept. Mary Shelley, for example, said the idea
for her novel Frankenstein came to her in a dream. Although it has
not been shown that dreaming is the driving force behind innova
tion, one study suggests that sleep is needed for creative problem-
solving. In that study, volunteers were asked to perform a memory
task and then were tested on it 8 hours later. Those who were
allowed to sleep for 8 hours immediately after trying the task and
before being tested were much more likely to find a creative way of
simplifying the task and improving their performance, compared
with those who were awake the entire 8 hours before being tested.
Exactly what happens during sleep to improve our learning, memo
ry, and insight isn’t known. Experts suspect, however, that while
13
people sleep, they form or strengthen the pathways of brain cells
needed to perform these tasks. This process may explain why sleep
is needed for proper brain development in infants.
Not only is a good night’s sleep required to form new learning and
memory pathways in the brain, but also sleep is necessary for those
pathways to work well. Several studies show that lack of sleep
causes thinking processes to slow down. Lack of sleep also makes it
harder to focus and pay attention. Lack of sleep can make you
more easily confused. Studies also find that a lack of sleep leads to
faulty decisionmaking and more risk taking. A lack of sleep slows
down your reaction time, which is particularly important to driving
and other tasks that require quick response. When people who lack
sleep are tested on a driving simulator, they perform just as poorly
as people who are drunk. (See “Crash in Bed, Not on the Road” on
page 16.) The bottom line is: Not getting a good night’s sleep can
be dangerous!
Even if you don’t have a mentally or physically challenging day
ahead of you, you should still get enough sleep to put yourself in a
good mood. Most people report being irritable, if not downright
unhappy, when they lack sleep. People who chronically suffer from
a lack of sleep, either because they do not spend enough time in bed
or because they have an untreated sleep disorder, are at greater risk
of developing depression. One group of people who usually don’t
get enough sleep is mothers of newborns. Some experts think
depression after childbirth (postpar
tum blues) is caused, in part, by a
lack of sleep.
Your Heart
Sleep gives your heart and
vascular system a much-needed
rest. During non-REM sleep,
your heart rate and blood
pressure progressively
slow as you enter deeper
sleep. During REM
sleep, in response to
dreams, your heart
What Does Sleep Do for You?
14Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
and breathing rates can rise and fall and your blood pressure can be
variable. These changes throughout the night in blood pressure and
heart and breathing rates seem to promote cardiovascular health.
If you don’t get enough sleep, the nightly dip in blood pressure that
appears to be important for good cardiovascular health may not
occur. Failure to experience the normal dip in blood pressure during
sleep can be related to insufficient sleep time, an untreated sleep
disorder (for example, sleep apnea), or other factors. Some sleep-
related abnormalities may be markers of heart disease and increased
risk of stroke.
A lack of sleep also puts your body under stress and may trigger the
release of more adrenaline, cortisol, and other stress hormones
during the day. These hormones keep your blood pressure from
dipping during sleep, which increases your risk for heart disease.
Lack of sleep also may trigger your body to produce more of certain
proteins thought to play a role in heart disease. For example, some
studies find that people who repeatedly don’t get enough sleep have
higher than normal blood levels of C-reactive protein, a sign of
inflammation. High levels of this protein may indicate an increased
risk for a condition called atherosclerosis, or hardening of the
arteries.
Your Hormones
When you were young, your mother may have told you that you
need to get enough sleep to grow strong and tall. She may have
been right! Deep sleep (stage 3 non-REM sleep) triggers more
release of growth hormone, which contributes to growth in children
and boosts muscle mass and the repair of cells and tissues in
children and adults. Sleep’s effect on the release of sex hormones
also contributes to puberty and fertility. Consequently, women who
work at night and tend to lack sleep may be at increased risk of
miscarriage.
Your mother also probably was right if she told you that getting a
good night’s sleep on a regular basis would help keep you from
getting sick and help you get better if you do get sick. During sleep,
your body creates more cytokines—cellular hormones that help the
immune system fight various infections. Lack of sleep can reduce
your body’s ability to fight off common infections. Research also
reveals that a lack of sleep can reduce the body’s response to the flu
15
vaccine. For example, sleep-deprived volunteers given the flu
vaccine produced less than half as many flu antibodies as those who
were well rested and given the same vaccine.
Although lack of exercise and other factors also contribute, the
current epidemic of diabetes and obesity seems to be related, at least
in part, to chronically short or disrupted sleep or not sleeping during
the night. Evidence is growing that sleep is a powerful regulator of
appetite, energy use, and weight control. During sleep, the body’s
production of the appetite suppressor leptin increases, and the
appetite stimulant grehlin decreases. Studies find that the less people
sleep, the more likely they are to be overweight or obese and prefer
eating foods that are higher in calories and carbohydrates. People
who report an average total sleep time of 5 hours a night, for
example, are much more likely to become obese, compared with
people who sleep 7–8 hours a night.
A number of hormones released during sleep also control the body’s
use of energy. A distinct rise and fall of blood sugar levels during
sleep appears to be linked to sleep stages. Not sleeping at the right
time, not getting enough sleep overall, or not enough of each stage
of sleep disrupts this pattern. One study found that, when healthy
young men slept only 4 hours a night for 6 nights in a row, their
insulin and blood sugar levels matched
those seen in people who were
developing diabetes. Another
study found that women who
slept less than 7 hours a night
were more likely to develop
diabetes over time than
those who slept between
7 and 8 hours a night.
What Does Sleep Do for You?
16Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
Crash in Bed
Not on the Road
Most people are aware of the hazards of drunk driving. But
driving while sleepy can be just as dangerous. Indeed,
crashes due to sleepy drivers are as deadly as those due to
drivers impaired by alcohol. And you don’t have to be asleep
at the wheel to put yourself and others in danger. Both
alcohol and a lack of sleep limit your ability to react quickly
to a suddenly braking car, a sharp curve in the road, or other
situations that require rapid responses. Just a few seconds’
delay in reaction time can be a life-or-death matter when
driving. When people who lack sleep are tested on a driving
simulator, they perform as badly as or worse than those who
are drunk. The combination of alcohol and lack of sleep can
be especially dangerous. There is increasing evidence that
sleep deprivation and inexperience behind the wheel, both
particularly common in adolescents, is a lethal combination.
Of course, driving is also hazardous if you fall asleep at the
wheel, which happens surprisingly often. One-quarter of
the drivers surveyed in New York State reported they had
fallen asleep at the wheel at some time. Often, people briefly
nod off at the wheel without being aware of it—they just
can’t recall what happened over the previous few seconds
or longer. And people who lack sleep are more apt to take
risks and make poor judgments, which also can boost their
chances of getting in a car crash.
Opening a window or turning up the radio won’t help you
stay awake while driving. The bottom line is that there is no
substitute for sleep. Be aware of these warning signs that
you are too sleepy to drive safely: trouble keeping your eyes
open or focused, continual yawning, or being unable to recall
driving the past few miles. Remember, if you are short on
sleep, stay out of the driver’s seat!
17
Here are some potentially life-saving tips for avoiding drowsy
driving:
l
l
l
l
l
l
Be well rested before hitting the road. If you have
several nights in a row of fewer than 7–8 hours of sleep,
your reaction time slows. Restoring that reaction time
to normal can take more than one night of good sleep,
because a sleep debt accumulates after each night you
lose sleep. It may take several nights of being well rested
to repay that sleep debt and make you ready for driving on
a long road trip.
Avoid driving between midnight and 7 a.m. Unless you
are accustomed to being awake then, this period of time is
when we are naturally the least alert and most tired.
Don’t drive alone. A companion who can keep you
engaged in conversation might help you stay awake while
driving.
Schedule frequent breaks on long road trips. If you feel
sleepy while driving, pull off the road and take a nap for
15–20 minutes.
Don’t drink alcohol. Just one beer when you are sleep
deprived will affect you as much as two or three beers
when you are well rested.
Don’t count on caffeine or other tricks. Although
drinking a cola or a cup of coffee might help keep you
awake for a short time, it won’t overcome extreme
sleepiness or relieve a sleep debt.
What Does Sleep Do for You?
18Your Guide to Healthy SleepI wake up early to get ready for school.
I am tired in the morning, and by the end
of the school day, I am very tired again. An
afterschool nap seems to refresh me and
help me focus on homework. Without it,
I am grumpy and stressed, can’t focus, and
sometimes get headaches.
D A P H N E
“
”
19
How Much Sleep Is
Enough?
Animal studies suggest that sleep is as vital as food for survival.
Rats, for example, normally live 2–3 years, but they live only
5 weeks if they are deprived of REM sleep and only 2–3 weeks if
they are deprived of all sleep stages—a timeframe similar to death
due to starvation. But how much sleep do humans need? To help
answer that question, scientists look at how much people sleep when
unrestricted, the average amount of sleep among various age groups,
and the amount of sleep that studies reveal is necessary to function
at your best.
When healthy adults are given unlimited opportunity to sleep, they
sleep on average between 8 and 8.5 hours a night. But sleep needs
vary from person to person. Some people appear to need only about
7 hours to avoid problem sleepiness, whereas others need 9 or more
hours of sleep. Sleep needs also change throughout the life cycle.
Newborns sleep between 16 and 18 hours a day, and children in
preschool sleep between 11 and 12 hours a day. School-aged
children and adolescents need at least 10 hours of sleep each night.
The hormonal influences of puberty tend to shift adolescents’ biologi
cal clocks. As a result, teenagers (who need between 9 and 10 hours
of sleep a night) are more likely to go to bed later than younger
children and adults, and they tend to want to sleep later in the
morning. This delayed sleep–wake rhythm conflicts with the early-
morning start times of many high schools and helps explain why
most teenagers get an average of only 7–7.5 hours of sleep a night.
As people get older, the pattern of sleep also changes—especially the
amount of time spent in deep sleep. This explains why children can
sleep through loud noises and why they might not wake up when
moved. Across the lifespan, the sleep period tends to advance,
namely relative to teenagers; older adults tend to go to bed earlier
and wake earlier. The quality—but not necessarily the quantity—of
How Much Sleep Is Enough?
20Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
deep, non-REM sleep also changes, with a trend toward lighter
sleep. The relative percentages of stages of sleep appear to stay
mostly constant after infancy. From midlife through late life, people
awaken more throughout the night. These sleep disruptions cause
older people to lose more and more of stages 1 and 2 non-REM
sleep as well as REM sleep.
Some older people complain of difficulty falling asleep, early
morning awakenings, frequent and long awakenings during the
night, daytime sleepiness, and a lack of refreshing sleep. Many sleep
problems, however, are not a natural part of
sleep in the elderly. Their sleep complaints
may be due, in part, to medical conditions,
illnesses, or medications they are taking—
all of which can disrupt sleep. In fact, one
study found that the prevalence of sleep
problems is very low in healthy older adults.
Other causes of some of older adults’
sleep complaints are sleep apnea, restless
legs syndrome, and other sleep disorders
that become more common with age.
Also, older people are more likely to
have their sleep disrupted by the need
to urinate during the night.
Some evidence shows that the
biological clock shifts in older
people, so they are more apt to go to
sleep earlier at night and wake up
earlier in the morning. No evidence
indicates that older people can get
by with less sleep than younger
people. (See “Top 10 Sleep Myths”
on page 22.) Poor sleep in older
people may result in excessive
daytime sleepiness, attention
and memory problems, depressed
mood, and overuse of sleeping pills.
Despite variations in sleep quantity
and quality, both related to age and
21
between individuals, studies suggest that the optimal amount of
sleep needed to perform adequately, avoid a sleep debt, and not have
problem sleepiness during the day is about 7–8 hours for adults and
at least 10 hours for school-aged children and adolescents. Similar
amounts seem to be necessary to avoid an increased risk of develop
ing obesity, diabetes, or cardiovascular diseases.
Quality of sleep and the timing of sleep are as important as quantity.
People whose sleep is frequently interrupted or cut short may not get
enough of both non-REM sleep and REM sleep. Both types of sleep
appear to be crucial for learning and memory—and perhaps for the
restorative benefits of healthy sleep, including the growth and repair
of cells.
Many people try to make up for lost sleep during the week by
sleeping more on the weekends. But if you have lost too much sleep,
sleeping in on a weekend does not completely erase your sleep debt.
Certainly, sleeping more at the end of a week won’t make up for any
poor performance you had earlier in that week. Just one night of
inadequate sleep can negatively affect your functioning and mood
during at least the next day.
Daytime naps are another strategy some people use to make up for
lost sleep during the night. Some evidence shows that
short naps (up to an hour) can make up, at least
partially, for the sleep missed on the previous
night and improve alertness, mood, and work
performance. But naps don’t substitute for a
good night’s sleep. One study found that a
daytime nap after a lack of sleep at night did
not fully restore levels of blood sugar to the
pattern seen with adequate nighttime
sleep. If a nap lasts longer than
20 minutes, you may have a hard
time waking up fully.
In addition, late afternoon
naps can make falling asleep
at night more difficult.
How Much Sleep Is Enough?
22Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
Top 10
Sleep Myths
Myth 1: Sleep is a time when your body and brain shut down
for rest and relaxation. No evidence shows that any major
organ (including the brain) or regulatory system in the body shuts
down during sleep. Some physiological processes actually
become more active while you sleep. For example, secretion of
certain hormones is boosted, and activity of the pathways in the
brain linked to learning and memory increases.
Myth 2: Getting just 1 hour less sleep per night than needed
will not have any effect on your daytime functioning. This
lack of sleep may not make you noticeably sleepy during
the day. But even slightly less sleep can affect your ability
to think properly and respond quickly, and it can impair your
cardiovascular health and energy balance as well as your body’s
ability to fight infections, particularly if lack of sleep continues. If
you consistently do not get enough sleep, a sleep debt builds up
that you can never repay. This sleep debt affects your health and
quality of life and makes you feel tired during the day.
Myth 3: Your body adjusts quickly to different sleep
schedules. Your biological clock makes you most alert during
the daytime and least alert at night. Thus, even if you work
the night shift, you will naturally feel sleepy when nighttime
comes. Most people can reset their biological clock, but only by
appropriately timed cues—and even then, by 1–2 hours per day
at best. Consequently, it can take more than a week to adjust
to a substantial change in your sleep–wake cycle—for example,
when traveling across several time zones or switching from
working the day shift to the night shift.
Myth 4: People need less sleep as they get older. Older
people don’t need less sleep, but they may get less sleep or find
their sleep less refreshing. That’s because as people age, the
quality of their sleep changes. Older people are also more
likely to have insomnia or other medical conditions that disrupt
their sleep.
23
Myth 5: Extra sleep for one night can cure you of problems
with excessive daytime fatigue. Not only is the quantity of
sleep important, but also the quality of sleep. Some people
sleep 8 or 9 hours a night but don’t feel well rested when they
wake up because the quality of their sleep is poor. A number of
sleep disorders and other medical conditions affect the quality
of sleep. Sleeping more won’t lessen the daytime sleepiness
these disorders or conditions cause. However, many of these
disorders or conditions can be treated effectively with changes
in behavior or with medical therapies. Additionally, one night of
increased sleep may not correct multiple nights of inadequate
sleep.
Myth 6: You can make up for lost sleep during the week
by sleeping more on the weekends. Although this sleeping
pattern will help you feel more rested, it will not completely
make up for the lack of sleep or correct your sleep debt.
This pattern also will not necessarily make up for impaired
performance during the week or the physical problems that can
result from not sleeping enough. Furthermore, sleeping later on
the weekends can affect your biological clock, making it much
harder to go to sleep at the right time on Sunday nights and get
up early on Monday mornings.
Myth 7: Naps are a waste of time. Although naps are no
substitute for a good night’s sleep, they
can be restorative and help counter
some of the effects of not getting
enough sleep at night. Naps can
actually help you learn how to do
certain tasks quicker. But avoid
taking naps later than 3 p.m.,
particularly if you have trouble falling
asleep at night, as late naps can make
it harder for you to fall asleep
when you go to bed. Also,
limit your naps to no
longer than 20 minutes,
because longer naps
will make it harder
to wake up and
How Much Sleep Is Enough?
24Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
Top 10
Sleep Myths (continued)
get back in the swing of things. If you take more than one or
two planned or unplanned naps during the day, you may have a
sleep disorder that should be treated.
Myth 8: Snoring is a normal part of sleep. Snoring during
sleep is common, particularly as a person gets older. Evidence
is growing that snoring on a regular basis can make you sleepy
during the day and increase your risk for diabetes and heart
disease. In addition, some studies link frequent snoring to
problem behavior and poorer school achievement in children.
Loud, frequent snoring also can be a sign of sleep apnea, a
serious sleep disorder that should be evaluated and treated.
(See “Is Snoring a Problem?” on page 30.)
Myth 9: Children who don’t get enough sleep at night will
show signs of sleepiness during the day. Unlike adults,
children who don’t get enough sleep at night typically become
hyperactive, irritable, and inattentive during the day. They also
have increased risk of injury and more behavior problems, and
their growth rate may be impaired. Sleep debt appears to be
quite common during childhood and may be misdiagnosed as
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Myth 10: The main cause of insomnia is worry. Although
worry or stress can cause a short bout of insomnia, a persistent
inability to fall asleep or stay asleep at night can be caused
by a number of other factors. Certain medications and sleep
disorders can keep you up at night. Other common causes of
insomnia are depression, anxiety disorders, and asthma, arthritis,
or other medical conditions with symptoms that tend to be
troublesome at night. Some people who have chronic insomnia
also appear to be more “revved up” than normal, so it is harder
for them to fall asleep.
Sleep Myths
25When medicines didn’t
work for me, I started
making big lifestyle
changes. Now I try to
eat a balanced diet and
walk for at least an hour
each day. Without doubt,
my weight loss and more
active lifestyle help me
sleep better.
What Disrupts Sleep?
Many factors can prevent a good night’s sleep. These factors range
from well-known stimulants, such as coffee, to certain pain relievers,
decongestants, and other culprits. Many people depend on the
caffeine in coffee, cola, or tea to wake them up in the morning or to
keep them awake. Caffeine is thought to block the cell receptors
that adenosine (a substance in the brain) uses to trigger its sleep-
inducing signals. In this way, caffeine fools the body into thinking it
isn’t tired. It can take as long as 6–8 hours for the effects of caffeine
to wear off completely. Thus, drinking a cup of coffee in the late
afternoon may prevent your falling asleep at night.
Nicotine is another stimulant that can keep you awake. Nicotine
also leads to lighter than normal sleep, and heavy smokers tend to
wake up too early because of nicotine withdrawal. Although
alcohol is a sedative that makes it easier to fall asleep, it prevents
deep sleep and REM sleep, allowing only the lighter stages of sleep.
People who drink alcohol also tend to wake up in the middle of the
night when the effects of an alcoholic “nightcap” wear off.
Certain commonly used prescrip
tion and over-the-counter medi
cines contain ingredients that can
keep you awake. These ingredients
include decongestants and steroids.
Many medicines taken to relieve
headaches contain caffeine. Heart
and blood pressure medications
known as beta blockers can make
it difficult to fall asleep and cause
more awakenings during the night.
People who have chronic asthma
or bronchitis also have more
problems falling asleep and staying
asleep than healthy people, either
because of their breathing difficul
ties or because of the medicines
What Disrupts Sleep?
S Z E - P I N G
“
”
26Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
they take. Other chronic painful or uncomfortable conditions—
such as arthritis, congestive heart failure, and sickle cell anemia—
can disrupt sleep, too.
A number of psychological disorders—including schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders—are well known for disrupt
ing sleep. Depression often leads to insomnia, and insomnia can
cause depression. Some of these psychological disorders are more
likely to disrupt REM sleep. Psychological stress also takes its toll
on sleep, making it more difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep.
People who feel stressed also tend to spend less time in deep sleep
and REM sleep. Many people report having difficulties sleeping if,
for example, they have recently lost a loved one, are going through a
divorce, or are under stress at work.
Menstrual cycle hormones can affect how well women sleep. Pro
gesterone is known to induce sleep and circulates in greater concen
trations in the second half of the menstrual cycle. For this reason,
women may sleep better during this phase of their menstrual cycle.
On the other hand, many women report trouble sleeping the night
before their menstrual flow starts. This sleep disruption may be
related to the abrupt drop in progesterone levels that occurs just
before menstruation. Women in their late forties and early fifties,
however, report more difficulties sleeping (insomnia) than younger
women. These difficulties may be linked to menopause, when they
have lower concentrations of progesterone. Hot flashes in women
of this age also may cause sleep disruption and difficulties.
Certain lifestyle factors also may deprive a person
of needed sleep. Large meals or vigorous
exercise just before bedtime can make it
harder to fall asleep. While vigorous exercise
in the evening may delay sleep onset for
various reasons, exercise in the daytime is
associated with improved nighttime sleep.
If you aren’t getting enough sleep
or aren’t falling asleep early
enough, you may be
overscheduling activi
ties that can pre
vent you from
getting the
27
quiet relaxation time you need to prepare for sleep. Most people
report that it’s easier to fall asleep if they have time to wind down
into a less active state before sleeping. Relaxing in a hot bath or
having a hot, caffeine-free beverage before bedtime may help. In
addition, your body temperature drops after a hot bath in a way
that mimics, in part, what happens as you fall asleep. Probably for
both these reasons, many people report that they fall asleep more
easily after a hot bath.
Your sleeping environment also can affect your sleep. Clear your
bedroom of any potential sleep distractions, such as noises, bright
lights, a TV, a cell phone, or computer. Having a comfortable
mattress and pillow can help promote a good night’s sleep. You also
sleep better if the temperature in your bedroom is kept on the cool
side. For more ideas on improving your sleep, check out the tips for
getting a good night’s sleep below.
Tips for Getting a
Good Night’s Sleep
l
l
l
Stick to a sleep schedule. Go to bed and wake up at the
same time each day. As creatures of habit, people have a
hard time adjusting to changes in sleep patterns. Sleeping
later on weekends won’t fully make up for a lack of sleep
during the week and will make it harder to wake up early on
Monday morning.
Exercise is great, but not too late in the day. Try to
exercise at least 30 minutes on most days but not later than
2–3 hours before your bedtime.
Avoid caffeine and nicotine. Coffee, colas, certain teas,
and chocolate contain the stimulant caffeine, and its effects
can take as long as 8 hours to wear off fully. Therefore, a
cup of coffee in the late afternoon can make it hard for you
to fall asleep at night. Nicotine is also a stimulant, often
causing smokers to sleep only very lightly. In addition,
smokers often wake up too early in the morning because of
nicotine withdrawal.
What Disrupts Sleep?
28Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
Tips for Getting a
Good Night’s Sleep (continued)
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Avoid alcoholic drinks before bed. Having a “nightcap” or
alcoholic beverage before sleep may help you relax, but heavy
use robs you of deep sleep and REM sleep, keeping you in
the lighter stages of sleep. Heavy alcohol ingestion also may
contribute to impairment in breathing at night. You also tend
to wake up in the middle of the night when the effects of the
alcohol have worn off.
Avoid large meals and beverages late at night. A light snack
is okay, but a large meal can cause indigestion that interferes
with sleep. Drinking too many fluids at night can cause
frequent awakenings to urinate.
If possible, avoid medicines that delay or disrupt your
sleep. Some commonly prescribed heart, blood pressure, or
asthma medications, as well as some over-the-counter and
herbal remedies for coughs, colds, or allergies, can disrupt
sleep patterns. If you have trouble sleeping, talk to your doctor
or pharmacist to see whether any drugs you’re taking might
be contributing to your insomnia and ask whether they can be
taken at other times during the day or early in the evening.
Don’t take naps after 3 p.m. Naps can help make up for lost
sleep, but late afternoon naps can make it harder to fall asleep
at night.
Relax before bed. Don’t overschedule your day so that no
time is left for unwinding. A relaxing activity, such as reading or
listening to music, should be part of your bedtime ritual.
Take a hot bath before bed. The drop in body temperature
after getting out of the bath may help you feel sleepy, and the
bath can help you relax and slow down so you’re more ready to
sleep.
Have a good sleeping environment. Get rid of anything
in your bedroom that might distract you from sleep, such
as noises, bright lights, an uncomfortable bed, or warm
temperatures. You sleep better if the temperature in the room
29
is kept on the cool side. A TV, cell phone, or computer in the
bedroom can be a distraction and deprive you of needed sleep.
Having a comfortable mattress and pillow can help promote a
good night’s sleep. Individuals who have insomnia often watch
the clock. Turn the clock’s face out of view so you don’t worry
about the time while trying to fall asleep.
l
l
l
Have the right sunlight exposure. Daylight is key to
regulating daily sleep patterns. Try to get outside in natural
sunlight for at least 30 minutes each day. If possible, wake
up with the sun or use very bright lights in the morning. Sleep
experts recommend that, if you have problems falling asleep,
you should get an hour of exposure to morning sunlight and
turn down the lights before bedtime.
Don’t lie in bed awake. If you find yourself still awake after
staying in bed for more than 20 minutes or if you are starting
to feel anxious or worried, get up and do some relaxing
activity until you feel sleepy. The anxiety of not being able to
sleep can make it harder to
fall asleep.
See a doctor if you
continue to have
trouble sleeping. If you
consistently find it difficult
to fall or stay asleep and/
or feel tired or not well
rested during the day
despite spending enough
time in bed at night, you
may have a sleep disorder.
Your family doctor or a
sleep specialist should
be able to help you, and
it is important to rule out
other health or psychiatric
problems that may be
disturbing your sleep.
What Disrupts Sleep?
30My wife noticed that
I snored loudly and
sometimes stopped
breathing in the middle
of the night. She was the
one who finally pushed me
to see a doctor.
Is Snoring a Problem?
Long the material for jokes, snoring is generally accepted as com
mon and annoying in adults but as nothing to worry about. How
ever, snoring is no laughing matter. Frequent, loud snoring is often a
sign of sleep apnea and may increase your risk of developing cardio
vascular disease and diabetes. Snoring also may lead to daytime
sleepiness and impaired performance.
Snoring is caused by a narrowing or partial blockage of the airways
at the back of your mouth, throat, or nose. This obstruction results
in increased air turbulence when breathing in, causing the soft
tissues in your upper airways to vibrate. The end result is a noisy
snore that can disrupt the sleep of your bed partner. This narrowing
of the airways is typically caused by the soft palate, tongue, and
throat relaxing while you sleep, but allergies or sinus problems also
can contribute to a narrowing of the airways, as can being over
weight and having extra soft tissue around your upper airways.
The larger the tissues in your soft palate (the roof of your mouth in
the back of your throat), the more likely you are to snore while
sleeping. Alcohol or sedatives taken shortly before sleep also
promote snoring. These drugs cause greater relaxation of the tissues
Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
in your throat and mouth. Surveys
reveal that about one-half of all
adults snore, and 50 percent of
these adults do so loudly and
frequently. African Americans,
Asians, and Hispanics are more
likely to snore loudly and frequent
ly compared with Caucasians,
and snoring problems increase
with age.
Not everyone who snores has sleep
apnea, but people who have sleep
apnea typically do snore loudly
and frequently. Sleep apnea is a
J I M
“
”
31
serious sleep disorder, and its hallmark is loud, frequent snoring
with pauses in breathing or shallow breaths while sleeping. (See
“Sleep Apnea” on page 38.) Even if you don’t experience these
breathing pauses, snoring can still be a problem for you as well as
for your bed partner. Snoring adds extra effort to your breathing,
which can reduce the quality of your sleep and lead to many of the
same health consequences as sleep apnea.
One study found that older adults who did not have sleep apnea,
but who snored 6–7 nights a week, were more than twice as likely to
report being extremely sleepy during the day than those who never
snored. The more people snored, the more daytime fatigue they
reported. That sleepiness may help explain why snorers are more
likely to be in car crashes than people who don’t snore. Loud
snoring also can disrupt the sleep of bed partners and strain marital
relations, especially if snoring causes the spouses to sleep in separate
bedrooms.
In addition, snoring increases the risk of developing diabetes and
heart disease. One study found that women who snored regularly
were twice as likely as those who did not snore to develop diabetes,
even if they were not overweight (another risk factor for diabetes).
Other studies suggest that regular snoring may raise the lifetime risk
of developing high blood pressure, heart failure, and stroke.
About one-third of all pregnant women begin snoring for the first
time during their second trimester. If you are snoring while preg
nant, let your doctor know. Snoring in pregnancy can be associated
with high blood pressure and can have a negative effect on your
baby’s growth and development. Your doctor will keep a close eye
on your blood pressure throughout your pregnancy and can let you
know if any additional evaluations for the snoring might be useful.
In most cases, the snoring and any related high blood pressure will
go away shortly after delivery.
Snoring also can be a problem in children. As many as 10–15 per
cent of young children, who typically have enlarged adenoids and
tonsils (both tissues in the throat), snore on a regular basis. Several
studies show that children who snore (with or without sleep apnea)
are more likely than those who do not snore to score lower on tests
that measure intelligence, memory, and attention span. These
children also have more problematic behavior, including hyperactiv
ity. The end result is that children who snore don’t perform in
Is Snoring a Problem?
32Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
school as well as those who do not snore. Strikingly, snoring was
linked to a greater drop in IQ than that seen in children who had
elevated levels of lead in their blood. Although the behavior of
children improves after they stop snoring, studies suggest they may
continue to get poorer grades in school, perhaps because of lasting
effects on the brain linked to the snoring. You should have your
child evaluated by your doctor if the child snores loudly and
frequently—three to four times a week—especially if you note brief
pauses in breathing while asleep and if there are signs of hyperactiv
ity or daytime sleepiness, inadequate school achievement, or slower
than expected development.
Surgery to remove the adenoids and tonsils of children often can
cure their snoring and any associated sleep apnea. Such surgery has
been linked to a reduction in hyperactivity and improved ability to
pay attention, even in children who showed no signs of sleep apnea
before surgery.
Snoring in older children and adults may be relieved by less invasive
measures, however. These measures include losing weight, refraining
from use of tobacco, sleeping on the side rather than on the back, or
elevating the head while sleeping. Treating chronic congestion and
refraining from alcohol or sedatives before sleeping also may de
crease snoring. In some adults, snoring can be relieved by dental
appliances that reposition the soft tissues in the mouth. Although
numerous over-the-counter nasal strips and sprays claim to relieve
snoring, no scientific evidence supports those claims.
33
Common Sleep Disorders
A number of sleep disorders can disrupt your sleep quality and make
you overly sleepy during the day, even if you spent enough time in
bed to be well rested. (See “Common Signs of a Sleep Disorder” on
page 34.)
Common Sleep Disorders
More than 70 sleep disorders affect at least 40 million Americans
and account for an estimated $16 billion in medical costs each year,
not counting costs due to lost work time, car
accidents, and other factors.
The four most common sleep disorders
are insomnia, sleep apnea, restless legs
syndrome, and narcolepsy. Additional
sleep problems include chronic
insufficient sleep, circadian rhythm
abnormalities, and “parasomnias”
such as sleep walking, sleep paralysis,
and night terrors.
L A U R E N
“My restless legs syndrome
made me lose sleep and
affected my quality of life.
But I’m in a good place
right now. I’m taking the
right medicine for me, and
I’ve adopted a healthy,
active lifestyle. I am
very passionate
about taking control
of my health.
”
34Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Common Signs of a
Sleep disorder
Look over this list of common signs of a sleep disorder, and talk
to your doctor if you have any of them on three or more nights a
week:
It takes you more than 30 minutes to fall asleep at night.
You awaken frequently in the night and then have trouble
falling back to sleep again.
You awaken too early in the morning.
You often don’t feel well rested despite spending 7–8 hours or
more asleep at night.
You feel sleepy during the day and fall asleep within
5 minutes if you have an opportunity to nap, or you fall
asleep unexpectedly or at inappropriate times during the day.
Your bed partner claims you snore loudly, snort, gasp, or
make choking sounds while you sleep, or your partner notices
that your breathing stops for short periods.
You have creeping, tingling, or crawling feelings in your legs
that are relieved by moving or massaging them, especially in
the evening and when you try to fall asleep.
You have vivid, dreamlike experiences while falling asleep
or dozing.
You have episodes of sudden muscle weakness when you are
angry or fearful, or when you laugh.
You feel as though you cannot move when you first wake up.
Your bed partner notes that your legs or arms jerk often
during sleep.
You regularly need to use stimulants to stay awake during
the day.
Also keep in mind that, although children can show some of
these signs of a sleep disorder, they often do not show signs
of excessive daytime sleepiness. Instead, they may seem
overactive and have difficulty focusing and concentrating.
They also may not do their best in school.
35
n
n
Insomnia
Insomnia is defined as having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep,
or as having unrefreshing sleep despite having ample opportunity to
sleep. Life is filled with events that occasionally cause insomnia for
a short time. Such temporary insomnia is common and is often
brought on by situations such as stress at work, family pressures, or
a traumatic event. A National Sleep Foundation poll of adults in the
United States found that close to half of the respondents reported
temporary insomnia in the nights immediately after the terrorist
attacks on September 11, 2001.
Chronic insomnia is defined as having symptoms at least 3 nights
per week for more than 1 month. Most cases of chronic insomnia
are secondary, which means they are due to another disorder or
medications. Primary chronic insomnia is a distinct sleep disorder;
its cause is not yet well understood. About 30–40 percent of adults
say they have some symptoms of insomnia within any given year,
and about 10–15 percent of adults say they have chronic insomnia.
Chronic insomnia becomes more common with age, and women are
more likely than men to report having insomnia.
Insomnia often causes problems during the day, such as extreme
sleepiness, fatigue, a lack of energy, difficulty concentrating,
depressed mood, and irritability. Thus, untreated insomnia can
impair quality of life as much as, or more than, other chronic
medical problems.
Chronic insomnia is often caused by one or more of the following:
A disease or mood disorder. The most common causes of
insomnia are depression and/or anxiety disorders. Neuro
logical disorders, such as Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s disease,
also can have insomnia as a symptom. Chronic insomnia can
result from thyroid dysfunction, arthritis, asthma, or other
medical conditions in which symptoms become more trouble
some at night, making it difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep.
Various prescribed and over-the-counter medications that can
disrupt sleep, such as decongestants, certain pain relievers,
and steroids.
Common Sleep Disorders
36Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
n
n
Sleep-disrupting behavior such as drinking alcohol, exercising
shortly before bedtime, ingesting caffeine late in the day,
watching TV or reading while in bed, or irregular sleep
schedules due to shift work or other causes.
Another sleep disorder, such as sleep apnea or restless legs
syndrome.
Some people, however, have primary chronic insomnia. This condi
tion is linked to a tendency to be more “revved up” than normal
(hyperarousal). People who have primary chronic insomnia may
have heightened levels of certain hormones, higher body tempera
tures, faster heart rates, and a different pattern of brain waves while
they sleep.
Doctors diagnose insomnia based mainly on sleep history, often by
reviewing a sleep diary. An overnight sleep recording may be
required if another sleep disorder is suspected. Doctors also will try
to diagnose and treat any other underlying medical or psychological
problems as well as identify behaviors that might be causing the
insomnia.
Often, people who have insomnia enter into a vicious cycle—because
they’ve had trouble sleeping on previous nights, they become anxious
at the slightest sign that they may not be falling asleep right away.
That anxiety can make it more difficult for them to fall asleep. The
more time they spend in bed not sleeping, and watching the clock,
the more their anxiety—and sleeplessness—increases.
To break that cycle of anxiety and negative conditioning, experts
recommend going to bed only when you’re sleepy. If you can’t fall
asleep (or fall back to sleep) within 20 minutes, get out of bed, go
into another room, and do a relaxing activity (such as reading) until
you feel sleepy again. Then return to bed. Studies have shown that
this reconditioning therapy is an effective way to treat insomnia.
Relaxation therapy is another strategy that works for some people
who have insomnia. Relaxation therapy may include meditation
and other mental relaxation techniques. It also may include physical
relaxation techniques, such as progressively tensing and then relax
ing each of the muscle groups in your body before sleep. Another
method is to focus on breathing deeply. Relaxation therapy can help
your body and mind slow down so that you can fall asleep more
easily at bedtime.
37
Sleep restriction therapy also works for some people who have
insomnia. Calculate your average sleep time over the course of a
week, and then limit your nightly sleep time to that average. Gradu
ally add more sleep time each night until you achieve a more normal
night’s sleep. You should avoid daytime naps longer than 15–20 min
utes during sleep restriction therapy. Napping can make it harder to
fall asleep at night, which may prolong insomnia. In addition, during
sleep restriction therapy, avoid driving a car or operating dangerous
machinery until you are getting enough sleep at night.
All of these behavioral changes are part of a treatment called
cognitive behavioral therapy. Cognitive behavioral therapy also can
be used to replace negative thoughts about sleep, such as “I’ll never
fall asleep without sleeping pills,” with more realistic positive
thinking. Cognitive behavioral therapy is effective in most people
who have chronic insomnia.
Some people who have chronic insomnia that is not corrected by
behavioral therapy or treatment of an underlying condition
may need a prescription medication. You should talk to a doctor
before trying to treat insomnia with alcohol, over-the-counter or
prescribed short-acting sedatives, or sedating
antihistamines that induce drowsiness.
The benefits of these treatments are
limited, and they have risks. Some
may help you fall asleep but leave you
feeling unrefreshed in the morning.
Others have longer lasting effects and
leave you feeling still tired and groggy
in the morning. Some also may lose
their effectiveness over time.
Doctors may prescribe sedating
antidepressants for insomnia,
but the effectiveness of these
medicines in people who do
not have depression is not
known, and there are
significant side effects.
Common Sleep Disorders
38Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
To treat their insomnia, some people pursue “natural” remedies,
such as melatonin supplements or valerian teas or extracts. These
remedies are available over the counter. Little evidence exists that
melatonin can help relieve insomnia. Studies with valerian also have
been inconclusive, and the actual dose and purity of various
supplements, extracts, or teas that contain valerian may vary from
product to product. In addition, because melatonin, valerian, and
other natural remedies are not regulated by the Food and Drug
Administration, their safety is not monitored.
Sleep Apnea
In people who have sleep apnea (also referred to as sleep-disordered
breathing), breathing briefly stops or becomes very shallow during
sleep. This change is caused by intermittent blocking of the upper
airway, usually when the soft tissue in the rear of the throat
collapses and partially or completely closes the airway. Each pause
in breathing typically lasts 10–120 seconds and may occur 20–30
times or more each sleeping hour.
If you have sleep apnea, not enough air can flow into your lungs
through your mouth and nose during sleep, even though breathing
efforts continue. When this happens, the amount of oxygen in your
blood decreases. Your brain responds by awakening you enough to
tighten the upper airway muscles and open your windpipe. Normal
breaths then start again, often with a loud snort or choking sound.
Although people who have sleep apnea typically snore loudly and
frequently, not everyone who snores has sleep apnea. (See “Is
Snoring a Problem?” on page 30.)
Because people who have sleep apnea frequently go from deeper
sleep to lighter sleep during the night, they rarely spend enough time
in deep, restorative stages of sleep. They are therefore often exces
sively sleepy during the day. Such sleepiness is thought to lead to
mood and behavior problems, including depression, and it more
than triples the risk of being in a traffic or work-related accident.
The many brief drops in blood-oxygen levels that occur during the
night can result in morning headaches and trouble concentrating,
thinking clearly, learning, and remembering. Additionally, the
intermittent oxygen drops and reduced sleep quality together trigger
the release of stress hormones. These hormones raise your blood
pressure and heart rate and boost the risk of heart attack, stroke,
irregular heartbeats, and congestive heart failure. In addition,
39 Common Sleep DisordersI realize now that my sleep apnea
affected my quality of life. I felt tired
all the time—so tired that I couldn’t
exercise or spend time with my kids.
I had other sleep apnea symptoms
that affected my work—headaches,
confusion, making errors, etc.
“Looking back, I know
that I should have taken
it more seriously and
told my doctor about my
symptoms many years
before I did.
“One thing that helps me is
physical activity. Now that
I am feeling better, I come
home from work with
enough energy to have an
exercise routine.
J I M
“
”
40Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
untreated sleep apnea can lead to changes in energy metabolism (the
way your body changes food and oxygen into energy) that increase
the risk for developing obesity and diabetes.
Anyone can have sleep apnea. It is estimated that at least 12–18
million American adults have sleep apnea, making it as common as
asthma. More than one-half of the people who have sleep apnea are
overweight. Sleep apnea is more common in men. More than 1 in
25 middle-aged men and 1 in 50 middle-aged women have sleep
apnea along with extreme daytime sleepiness. About 3 percent of
children and 10 percent or more of people over age 65 have sleep
apnea. This condition occurs more frequently in African Americans,
Asians, Native Americans, and Hispanics than in Caucasians.
More than one-half of all people who have sleep apnea are not
diagnosed. People who have sleep apnea generally are not aware
that their breathing stops in the night. They just notice that they
don’t feel well rested when they wake up and are sleepy throughout
the day. Their bed partners are likely to notice, however, that they
snore loudly and frequently and that they
often stop breathing briefly while
sleeping. Doctors suspect sleep apnea
if these symptoms are present, but
the diagnosis must be confirmed
with overnight sleep monitoring.
(See “How Are Sleep Disorders
Diagnosed?” on page 44.) This
monitoring will reveal pauses in
breathing, frequent sleep
arousals (changes from
sleep to wakefulness), and
intermittent drops in
levels of oxygen in
the blood.
41
n
n
n
n
Like adults who have sleep apnea, children who have this disorder
usually snore loudly, snort or gasp, and have brief pauses in breath
ing while sleeping. Small children often have enlarged tonsils and
adenoids that increase their risk for sleep apnea. But doctors may
not suspect sleep apnea in children because, instead of showing the
typical signs of sleepiness during the day, these children often
become agitated and may be considered hyperactive. The effects of
sleep apnea in children may include poor school performance and
difficult, aggressive behavior.
A number of factors can make a person susceptible to sleep apnea.
These factors include:
n
n
n
n
n
n
Throat muscles and tongue that relax more than normal while
asleep
Enlarged tonsils and adenoids
Being overweight—the excess fat tissue around your neck
makes it harder to keep the throat area open
Head and neck shape that creates a somewhat smaller airway
size in the mouth and throat area
Congestion, due to allergies, that also can narrow the airway
Family history of sleep apnea
If your doctor suspects that you have sleep apnea, you may be
referred to a sleep specialist. Some of the ways to help diagnose
sleep apnea include:
A medical history that includes asking you and your family
questions about how you sleep and how you function during
the day.
Checking your mouth, nose, and throat for extra or large
tissues—for example, checking the tonsils, uvula (the tissue
that hangs from the middle of the back of the mouth), and soft
palate (the roof of your mouth in the back of your throat).
An overnight recording of what happens with your breathing
during sleep (polysomnogram, or PSG).
A multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), usually done in a sleep
center, to see how quickly you fall asleep at times when you
would normally be awake. (Falling asleep in only a few
minutes usually means that you are very sleepy during the day.
Being very sleepy during the day can be a sign of sleep apnea.)
Common Sleep Disorders
42Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
n
n
n
Once all the tests are completed, the sleep specialist will review the
results and work with you and your family to develop a treatment
plan. Changes in daily activities or habits may help reduce your
symptoms:
Sleep on your side instead of on your back. Sleeping on your
side will help reduce the amount of upper airway collapse
during sleep.
Avoid alcohol, smoking, sleeping pills, herbal supplements,
and any other medications that make you sleepy. They make
it harder for your airways to stay open while you sleep, and
sedatives can make the breathing pauses longer and more
severe. Tobacco smoke irritates the airways and can help
trigger the intermittent collapse of the upper airway.
Lose weight if you are overweight. Even a little weight loss
can sometimes improve symptoms.
These changes may be all that are needed to treat mild sleep apnea.
However, if you have moderate or severe sleep apnea, you will need
additional, more direct treatment approaches.
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is the most effective
treatment for sleep apnea in adults. A CPAP machine uses mild air
pressure to keep your airways open while you sleep. The machine
delivers air to your airways through a specially designed nasal mask.
The mask does not breathe for you; the flow of air creates increased
pressure to keep the airways in your nose and mouth more open
while you sleep. The air pressure is adjusted so that it is just enough
to stop your airways from briefly becoming too small during sleep.
The pressure is constant and continuous. Sleep apnea will return if
CPAP is stopped or if it is used incorrectly.
People who have severe sleep apnea symptoms generally feel much
better once they begin treatment with CPAP. CPAP treatment can
cause side effects in some people. Possible side effects include dry or
stuffy nose, irritation of the skin on the face, bloating of the stom
ach, sore eyes, or headaches. If you have trouble with CPAP side
effects, work with your sleep specialist and support staff. Together,
you can do things to reduce or eliminate these problems.
Currently, no medications cure sleep apnea. However, some
prescription medications may help relieve the excessive sleepiness
that sometimes persists even with CPAP treatment of sleep apnea.
43My doctor prescribed CPAP (continuous positive airway
pressure) for me, but it was not easy to use at first. Sleeping
with a CPAP machine was uncomfortable for me, so I didn’t use
it like I should have—rarely, if at all. One day at work, I started
feeling really bad, so I went to the hospital. The doctors told
me that since I had not been using CPAP regularly, not enough
oxygen was going to my brain, which caused symptoms like
those for a stroke. So, I went back to my doctor and got a
different CPAP machine that was more comfortable for me.
“It’s important to talk with your health care provider to make
sure that your treatment is comfortable and works for you.
J I M
“
”
Another treatment approach that may help some people is the use of
a mouthpiece (oral or dental appliance). If you have mild sleep
apnea or do not have sleep apnea but snore very loudly, your doctor
or dentist also may recommend this. A custom-fitted plastic mouth
piece will be made by a dentist or an orthodontist (a specialist in
correcting teeth or jaw problems). The mouthpiece will adjust your
lower jaw and tongue to help keep the airway in your throat more
open while you are sleeping. Air can then flow more easily into your
lungs because there is less resistance to breathing. Following up
with the dentist or orthodontist is important to correct any side
effects and to be sure that your mouthpiece continues to fit properly.
It is also important to have a followup sleep study to see whether
your sleep apnea has improved.
Some people who have sleep apnea may benefit from surgery; this
depends on the findings of the evaluation by the sleep specialist.
Removing tonsils and adenoids that are blocking the airway is done
frequently, especially in children. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
(UPPP) is a surgery for adults that removes the tonsils, uvula, and
part of the soft palate. Tracheostomy is a surgery used rarely and
only in severe sleep apnea when no other treatments have been
successful. A small hole is made in the windpipe, and a tube is
inserted. Air will flow through the tube and into the lungs, bypass
ing the obstruction in the upper airway.
Common Sleep Disorders
44Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
l
l
l
How Are
Sleep disorders
diagnosed?
Depending on your symptoms, your doctor will gather informa
tion and consider several possible tests when trying to diagnose a
sleep disorder:
Sleep history and sleep log. Your doctor will ask you how
many hours you sleep each night, how often you awaken during
the night and for how long, how long it takes you to fall asleep,
how well rested you feel upon awakening, and how sleepy you
feel during the day. Your doctor may ask you to keep a sleep
diary for a few weeks. (See “Sample Sleep Diary” on page 54.)
Your doctor also may ask you whether you have any symptoms
of sleep apnea or restless legs syndrome, such as loud snoring,
snorting or gasping, morning headaches, tingling or unpleasant
sensations in the limbs that are relieved by moving them, and
jerking of the limbs during sleep. Your sleeping partner may be
asked whether you have some of these symptoms, as you may
not be aware of them yourself.
Sleep recording in a sleep laboratory (polysomnogram).
A sleep recording or polysomnogram (PSG) is usually done
while you stay overnight at a sleep center or sleep laboratory.
Electrodes and other monitors are placed on your scalp,
face, chest, limbs, and finger. While you sleep, these devices
measure your brain activity, eye movements, muscle activity,
heart rate and rhythm, blood pressure, and how much air
moves in and out of your lungs. This test also checks the
amount of oxygen in your blood. A PSG test is painless. In
certain circumstances, the PSG can be done at home. A home
monitor can be used to record heart rate, how air moves in and
out of your lungs, the amount of oxygen in your blood, and your
breathing effort.
Multiple sleep latency test (MSLT). This daytime sleep study
measures how sleepy you are and is particularly useful for
diagnosing narcolepsy. The MSLT is conducted in a sleep
45
laboratory and typically done after an overnight sleep recording
(PSG). In this test, monitoring devices for sleep stage are
placed on your scalp and face. You are asked to nap four
or five times for 20 minutes every 2 hours during the day.
Technicians note how quickly you fall asleep and how long it
takes you to reach various stages of sleep, especially REM
sleep, during your naps. Normal individuals either do not fall
asleep during these short designated naptimes or take a long
time to fall asleep. People who fall asleep in less than
5 minutes are likely to require treatment for a sleep disorder,
as are those who quickly reach REM sleep during their naps.
It is important to have a sleep specialist interpret the results of
your PSG or MSLT. See “How To Find a Sleep Center and Sleep
Specialist” on page 56.
Common Sleep Disorders
46Your Guide to Healthy SleepI started to get weird feelings in my legs at
night while I slept. To feel better, I would
get up and move around and stretch. Then
the weird feelings began to happen more
often and made me lose sleep. I started to
think that something was wrong. I decided
to go to the doctor and was diagnosed with
restless legs syndrome (RLS).
“Because RLS symptoms can
change, I’m always trying to find
the right mix of diet, medication,
and exercise. Exercise and
massage help me manage my
RLS. Yoga helps a lot too,
because of all the stretching
involved.
L A U R E N
“
”
47
Restless Legs Syndrome
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) causes an unpleasant prickling or
tingling in the legs, especially in the calves, that is relieved by mov
ing or massaging them. People who have RLS feel a need to stretch
or move their legs to get rid of the uncomfortable or painful feelings.
As a result, it may be difficult to fall asleep and stay asleep. One or
both legs may be affected. Some people also feel the sensations in
their arms. These sensations also can occur when lying down or
sitting for long periods of time, such as while at a desk, riding in a
car, or watching a movie.
Many people who have RLS also have brief limb movements during
sleep, often with abrupt onset, occurring every 5–90 seconds. This
condition, known as periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS), can
repeatedly awaken people who have RLS, reducing their total sleep
time and interrupting their sleep. Some people have PLMS but have
no abnormal sensations in their legs while awake.
RLS affects 5–15 percent of Americans, and its prevalence increases
with age. RLS occurs more often in women than men. One study
found that RLS accounted for one-third of the insomnia seen in
patients older than age 60. Children also can have RLS. In children,
the condition may be associated with symptoms of attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder. However, it’s not fully known how the
disorders are related. Sometimes “growing pains” can be mistaken
for RLS.
RLS is often inherited. Pregnancy, kidney failure, and anemia
related to iron or vitamin deficiency can trigger or worsen RLS
symptoms. Researchers suspect that these conditions cause an iron
deficiency that results in a lack of dopamine, which is used by the
brain to control physical sensation and limb movements. Doctors
usually can diagnose RLS by patients’ symptoms and a telltale
worsening of symptoms at night or while at rest. Some doctors may
order a blood test to check ferretin levels (ferretin is a form of iron).
Doctors also may ask people who have RLS to spend a night in a
sleep laboratory, where they are monitored to rule out other sleep
disorders and to document the excessive limb movements.
RLS is treatable but not always curable. Dramatic improvements
are seen quickly when patients are given dopamine-like drugs or
iron supplements. Alternatively, people who have milder cases may
be treated successfully with sedatives or behavioral strategies. These
Common Sleep Disorders
48Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
n
strategies include stretching, taking a hot bath, or massaging the legs
before bedtime. Avoiding caffeinated beverages also can help reduce
symptoms, and certain medications (e.g., some antidepressants,
particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) may cause RLS.
If iron or vitamin deficiency underlies RLS, symptoms may improve
with prescribed iron, vitamin B12, or folate supplements. Some
people may require anticonvulsant medications to control the
creeping and crawling sensations in their limbs. Others who have
severe symptoms that are associated with another medical disorder
or that do not respond to normal treatments may need to be treated
with pain relievers.
Narcolepsy
Narcolepsy’s main symptom is extreme and overwhelming daytime
sleepiness, even after adequate nighttime sleep. In addition,
nighttime sleep may be fragmented by frequent awakenings. People
who have narcolepsy often fall asleep at inappropriate times and
places. Although TV sitcoms occasionally feature these individuals
to generate a few laughs, narcolepsy is no laughing matter. People
who have narcolepsy experience daytime “sleep attacks” that last
from seconds to more than one-half hour, can occur without
warning, and may cause injury. These embarrassing sleep spells also
can make it difficult to work and to maintain normal personal or
social relationships.
With narcolepsy, the usually sharp distinctions between being asleep
and awake are blurred. Also, people who have narcolepsy tend to
fall directly into dream-filled REM sleep, rather than enter REM
sleep gradually after passing through the non-REM sleep stages first.
In addition to overwhelming daytime sleepiness, narcolepsy has
three other commonly associated symptoms, but these may not
occur in all people:
Sudden muscle weakness (cataplexy). This weakness is similar
to the paralysis that normally occurs during REM sleep, but it
lasts a few seconds to minutes while an individual is awake.
Cataplexy tends to be triggered by sudden emotional reac
tions, such as anger, surprise, fear, or laughter. The weakness
may show up as limpness at the neck, buckling of the knees,
or sagging facial muscles affecting speech, or it may cause a
complete body collapse.
49 Common Sleep DisordersAt first, I was misdiagnosed with chronic
fatigue syndrome, because I was in my
forties and narcolepsy symptoms usually
start during the teen years. Because
I didn’t have any of the symptoms of
chronic fatigue syndrome other than
sleepiness, I went to a neurologist for
help. He noticed the cataplexy (muscle
weakness) right away, and then I
was officially diagnosed with
narcolepsy and then later
on with borderline sleep
apnea.
“Even though there is no
cure for narcolepsy, you
can feel like you have control if
you manage it well.
“When you have narcolepsy, you live
your life differently. But with a good
plan and supportive friends and family,
it all turns out OK.
S Z E - P I N G
“
”
50Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
n
n
Sleep paralysis. People who have narcolepsy may experience
a temporary inability to talk or move when falling asleep or
waking up, as if they were glued to their beds.
Vivid dreams. These dreams can occur when people who
have narcolepsy first fall asleep or wake up. The dreams are
so lifelike that they can be confused with reality.
Experts estimate that as many as 350,000 Americans have narco
lepsy, but fewer than 50,000 are diagnosed. The disorder may be as
widespread as Parkinson’s disease or multiple sclerosis, and more
prevalent than cystic fibrosis, but it is less well known. Narcolepsy
is often mistaken for depression, epilepsy, or the side
effects of medicines.
Narcolepsy can be difficult to diagnose in people
who have only the symptom of excessive daytime
sleepiness. It is usually diagnosed during an
overnight sleep recording (PSG) that is followed
by an MSLT. (See “How Are Sleep Disorders
Diagnosed?” on page 44.) Both tests reveal
symptoms of narcolepsy—the tendency to
fall asleep rapidly and enter REM sleep
early, even during brief naps.
Narcolepsy can develop at any age, but
the symptoms tend to appear first during
adolescence or early adulthood. About 1
of every 10 people who have narcolepsy
has a close family member who has the
disorder, suggesting that one can inherit
a tendency to develop narcolepsy.
Studies suggest that a substance in the
brain called hypocretin plays a key
role in narcolepsy. Most people who
have narcolepsy lack hypocretin, which
promotes wakefulness. Scientists believe that
an autoimmune reaction—perhaps triggered
by disease, viral illness, or brain injury—
specifically destroys the hypocretin-generating
cells in the brains of people who have
narcolepsy.
51
Eventually, researchers may develop a treatment for narcolepsy that
restores hypocretin to normal levels. In the meantime, most people
who have narcolepsy find some to all of their symptoms relieved by
various drug treatments. For example, central nervous system
stimulants can reduce daytime sleepiness. Antidepressants and other
drugs that suppress REM sleep can prevent muscle weakness, sleep
paralysis, and vivid dreaming. Doctors also usually recommend that
people who have narcolepsy take short naps (10–15 minutes) two or
three times a day, if possible, to help control excessive daytime
sleepiness.
Parasomnias (Abnormal Arousals)
In some people, the walking, talking, and other body functions
normally suppressed during sleep occur during certain sleep stages.
Alternatively, the paralysis or vivid images usually experienced
during dreaming may persist after awakening. These occurrences
are collectively known as parasomnias and include confusional
arousals (a mixed state of being both asleep and awake), sleep
talking, sleep walking, night terrors, sleep paralysis, and REM sleep
behavior disorder (acting out dreams). Most of these disorders—
such as confusional arousals, sleep walking, and night terrors—are
more common in children, who tend to outgrow them once they
become adults. People who are sleep-deprived also may experience
some of these disorders, including sleep walking and sleep paralysis.
Sleep paralysis also commonly occurs in people who have narco
lepsy. Certain medications or neurological disorders appear to lead
to other parasomnias, such as REM sleep behavior disorder, and
these parasomnias tend to occur more in elderly people. If you or a
family member has persistent episodes of sleep paralysis, sleep
walking, or acting out of dreams, talk with your doctor. Taking
measures to assure the safety of children and other family members
who have partial arousals from sleep is very important.
Common Sleep Disorders
52Your Guide to Healthy SleepIt’s a scary experience, lying in bed, wanting
to get up, but unable to—scary enough to
almost make you not want to go to sleep
anymore. I can remember, as a child, feeling
as though there was a weight on me when
I was trying to wake up, and I couldn’t
move. When I would try to wake up, I would
kick my legs and flail my arms, sometimes
bumping my wife. I really didn’t have control
over my limbs.
“When the symptoms got really bad, I went
to a sleep specialist, who told me I had sleep
paralysis. My doctor prescribed a medicine
that has worked great for me. Now, I rarely
have sleep paralysis—maybe 3 times per
year.
L A W R E N C E
“
”
53
n
n
n
n
Do You Think You Have a
Sleep Disorder?
At various points in our lives, all of us suffer from a lack of sleep
that can be corrected by making sure we have the opportunity to get
enough sleep. But, if you are spending enough time in bed and still
wake up tired or feel very sleepy during the day, you may have a
sleep disorder. See “Common Signs of a Sleep Disorder” on page 34.
One of the best ways you can tell whether you are getting enough
good-quality sleep, and whether you have signs of a sleep disorder, is
by keeping a sleep diary. (See “Sample Sleep Diary” on page 54.)
Use this diary to record the quality and quantity of your sleep; your
use of medications, alcohol, and caffeinated beverages; your exercise
patterns; and how sleepy you feel during the day. After a week or
so, look over this information to see how many hours of sleep or
nighttime awakenings one night are linked to your being tired the
next day. This information will give you a sense of how much
uninterrupted sleep you need to avoid daytime sleepiness. You also
can use the diary to see some of the patterns or practices that may
keep you from getting a good night’s sleep.
You may have a sleep disorder and should see your doctor if your
sleep diary reveals any of the following:
You consistently take more than 30 minutes each night to fall
asleep.
You consistently awaken more than a few times or for long
periods of time each night.
You take frequent naps.
You often feel sleepy during the day—or you fall asleep at
inappropriate times during the day.
Do You Think You Have a Sleep Disorder?
54
Sample Sleep Diary
Name:
Complete in the Morning
Today’s date (include
month/day/year):
Monday*
Time I went to bed last night:
Time I woke up this morning:
No. of hours slept last night:
11 p.m.
7 a.m.
8
Number of awakenings and
total time awake last night:
5 times
2 hours
How long I took to fall asleep
last night:
30 mins.
Medications taken last night: None
How awake did I feel when
I got up this morning?
1—Wide awake
2—Awake but a little tired
3—Sleepy
2
Complete in the Evening
Number of caffeinated drinks
(coffee, tea, cola) and time
when I had them today:
1 drink at
8 p.m.
Number of alcoholic drinks
(beer, wine, liquor) and time
when I had them today:
2 drinks
9 p.m.
Naptimes and lengths today: 3:30 p.m.
45 mins.
Exercise times and lengths
today:
None
How sleepy did I feel during
the day today?
1—So sleepy had to struggle
1
to stay awake during much of
the day
2—Somewhat tired
3—Fairly alert
4—Wide awake
Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
* This column shows example diary entries—use as a model for your own diary notes.
55 Do You Think You Have a Sleep Disorder?
56Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
How To Find a Sleep Center
and Sleep Specialist
If your doctor refers you to a sleep center or sleep specialist, make
sure that center or specialist is qualified to diagnose and treat your
sleep problem. To find sleep centers accredited by the American
Academy of Sleep Medicine, go to
www.aasmnet.org and click on “Find a
Sleep Center” (under the Patients & Public
menu), or call 708–492–0930. To find
sleep specialists certified by the American
Board of Sleep Medicine, go to
www.absm.org and click on
“Verification of Diplomates of
the ABSM.”
57
n
n
n
n
Research
Researchers have learned a lot about sleep and sleep disorders in
recent years. That knowledge has led to a better understanding of
the importance of sleep to our lives and our health. Research
supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
(NHLBI) has helped identify some of the causes of sleep disorders
and their effects on the heart, brain, lungs, and other body systems.
The NHLBI also supports ongoing research on the most effective
ways to diagnose and treat sleep disorders.
Many questions remain about sleep and sleep disorders. The
NHLBI continues to support a range of research that focuses on:
Better understanding of how a lack of sleep increases the risk
for obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and stroke
New ways to diagnose sleep disorders
Genetic, environmental, and social factors that lead to sleep
disorders
The adverse effects from a lack of sleep on body and brain
Much of this research depends on the willingness of volunteers to
participate in clinical research. If you would like to help researchers
advance science on sleep or about a sleep disorder you have and
possible treatments, talk to your doctor about participating in
clinical research. (For more information, see “Clinical Research” on
page 58.)
Research
58Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
Clinical
research
Researchers can learn quite a bit about sleep and sleep disorders
by studying animals. However, to fully understand sleep and
its affect on health and functioning, as well as how best to
diagnose and treat sleep disorders, researchers need to do
clinical research on people. This type of research is called clinical
research because it is often conducted in clinical settings, such
as hospitals or doctors’ offices.
The two types of clinical research are clinical trials and clinical
studies.
l Clinical trials test new ways to diagnose, prevent, or
treat various disorders. For example, treatments (such as
medicines, medical devices, surgery, or other procedures)
for a disorder need to be tested in people who have the
disorder. A trial helps determine whether a treatment is safe
and effective in humans before it is made available for public
use. In a clinical trial, participants are randomly assigned
to groups. One group receives the new treatment being
tested. Other groups may receive a different treatment or
a placebo (an inactive substance resembling a drug being
tested). Comparing results from the groups gives researchers
confidence that changes in the test group are due to the new
treatment and not to other factors.
59
l
l
l
l
Other types of clinical studies are done to discover the
factors, including environmental, behavioral, or genetic
factors, that cause or worsen various disorders. Researchers
may follow a group of people over time to learn what factors
contribute to becoming sick.
Clinical studies and trials may be relatively brief, or may last for
years and require many visits to the study sites. These sites
usually are university hospitals or research centers, but they can
include private doctors’ offices and community hospitals.
If you participate in clinical research, the research will be
explained to you in detail, you will be given a chance to ask
questions, and you will be asked to provide written permission.
You may not directly benefit from the results of the clinical
research you participate in, but the information gathered will
help others and will add to scientific knowledge. Taking part in
clinical research has other benefits, as well. You’ll learn more
about your disorder, you’ll have the support of a team of health
care providers, and your health will likely be monitored closely.
However, participation also can have risks, which you should
discuss with your doctor. No matter what you decide, your
regular medical care will not be affected.
If you’re thinking about participating in a clinical study, you may
have questions about the purpose of the study, the types of tests
and treatment involved, how participation will affect your daily life,
and whether any costs are involved. Your doctor may be able to
answer some of your questions and help you find clinical studies
in which you can participate. You also can visit the following Web
sites to learn about being in a study and to search for clinical
trials being done on your disorder:
www.clinicaltrials.gov
http://clinicalresearch.nih.gov
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/studies/index.htm
Clinical Research
Research
60Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
For More Sleep Information
Resources From the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
National Center on Sleep Disorders Research
Division of Lung Diseases, NHLBI
Two Rockledge Centre, Suite 10170
6701 Rockledge Drive
Bethesda, MD 20895–7952
Phone: 301–435–0199
Fax: 301–480–3451
Web site: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/sleep
NHLBI Diseases and Conditions Index (DCI)
The DCI includes articles on sleep disorders, tests,
and procedures, along with videos, podcasts, and
Spanish-language articles.
Web site: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/dci/index.html
NHLBI Health Information Center
P.O. Box 30105
Bethesda, MD 20824–0105
Telephone: 301–592–8573
TTY: 240–629–3255
Fax: 301–592–8563
E-mail: nhlbiinfo@nhlbi.nih.gov
Web site: www.nhlbi.nih.gov
NIH Office of Science Education Web site (for high school
supplemental curriculum: Sleep, Sleep Disorders, and
Biological Rhythms)
http://science.education.nih.gov
61
Resources From Other Sleep Organizations
American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM)
2510 North Frontage Road
Darien, IL 60561
Telephone: 630–737–9700
Fax: 630–737–9790
Web site: www.aasmnet.org
American Sleep Apnea Association
6856 Eastern Avenue, NW., Suite 203
Washington, DC 20012
Telephone: 202–203–3650
Fax: 202–293–3656
Web site: www.sleepapnea.org
Narcolepsy Network
P.O. Box 294
Pleasantville, NY 10570
Telephone: 401–667–2523
Fax: 401–633–6567
E-mail: narnet@narcolepsynetwork.org
Web site: www.narcolepsynetwork.org
National Sleep Foundation
1010 North Glebe Road, Suite 310
Arlington, VA 22201
Telephone: 703–243–1697
E-mail: nsf@sleepfoundation.org
Web site: www.sleepfoundation.org
Restless Legs Syndrome Foundation
1610 14th Street, NW., Suite 300
Rochester, MN 55901
Telephone: 507–287–6465
Fax: 507–287–6312
E-mail: rlsfoundation@rls.org
Web site: www.rls.org
For More Sleep Information
62Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Notes
63
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Notes
Notes

Discrimination Prohibited: Under provisions of
applicable public laws enacted by Congress
since 1964, no person in the United States shall,
on the grounds of race, color, national origin,
handicap, or age, be excluded from participation
in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under any program or activity (or,
on the basis of sex, with respect to any educa-
tion program or activity) receiving Federal finan-
cial assistance. In addition, Executive Order
11141 prohibits discrimination on the basis of
age by contractors and subcontractors in the
performance of Federal contracts, and Executive
Order 11246 states that no federally funded con-
tractor may discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin. Therefore, the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute must be
operated in compliance with these laws and
Executive Orders.
NIH Publication No. 11-5271
Originally printed November 2005
Revised August 2011