The D. C. Circuit affirmed. 91 F. 4th 1173 (2024) (per curiam). Citing Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137 (1803),
 the court distinguished between two kinds of official acts:
 discretionary and ministerial. 91 F. 4th, at 1189–1190. It
 observed that “although discretionary acts are ‘only politically examinable,’ the judiciary has the power to hear cases”
 involving ministerial acts that an officer is directed to perform by the legislature. Ibid. (quoting Marbury, 1 Cranch,
 at 166). From this distinction, the D. C. Circuit concluded
 that the “separation of powers doctrine, as expounded in
 Marbury and its progeny, necessarily permits the Judiciary
 to oversee the federal criminal prosecution of a former President for his official acts because the fact of the prosecution
 means that the former President has allegedly acted in defiance of the Congress’s laws.” 91 F. 4th, at 1191. In the
 court’s view, the fact that Trump’s actions “allegedly violated generally applicable criminal laws” meant that those
 actions “were not properly within the scope of his lawful
 discretion.” Id., at 1192. The D. C. Circuit thus concluded
 that Trump had “no structural immunity from the charges
 in the Indictment.” Ibid. Like the District Court, the D. C. 
 We granted certiorari to consider the following question:
 “Whether and if so to what extent does a former President
 enjoy presidential immunity from criminal prosecution for
 conduct alleged to involve official acts during his tenure in
 office.” 601 U. S. ___ (2024).
 II
 This case is the first criminal prosecution in our Nation’s
 history of a former President for actions taken during his
 Presidency. We are called upon to consider whether and
 under what circumstances such a prosecution may proceed. Doing so requires careful assessment of the scope of
 Presidential power under the Constitution. We undertake
 that responsibility conscious that we must not confuse “the
 issue of a power’s validity with the cause it is invoked to
 promote,” but must instead focus on the “enduring consequences upon the balanced power structure of our Republic.” Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U. S. 579,
 634 (1952) (Jackson, J., concurring).
 The parties before us do not dispute that a former President can be subject to criminal prosecution for unofficial
 acts committed while in office. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 28.
 They also agree that some of the conduct described in the
 indictment includes actions taken by Trump in his unofficial capacity. See id., at 28–30, 36–37, 124.
 They disagree, however, about whether a former President can be prosecuted for his official actions. Trump contends that just as a President is absolutely immune from
 civil damages liability for acts within the outer perimeter of
 his official responsibilities, Fitzgerald, 457 U. S., at 756, he
 must be absolutely immune from criminal prosecution for
 such acts. Brief for Petitioner 10. And Trump argues that
 the bulk of the indictment’s allegations involve conduct in 
 

 6 TRUMP v. UNITED STATES
 Opinion of the Court
 his official capacity as President. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 30–
 32. Although the Government agrees that some official actions are included in the indictment’s allegations, see id., at
 125, it maintains that a former President does not enjoy immunity from criminal prosecution for any actions, regardless of how they are characterized. See Brief for United
 States 9.
 We conclude that under our constitutional structure of
 separated powers, the nature of Presidential power requires that a former President have some immunity from
 criminal prosecution for official acts during his tenure in
 office. At least with respect to the President’s exercise of
 his core constitutional powers, this immunity must be absolute. As for his remaining official actions, he is also entitled to immunity. At the current stage of proceedings in
 this case, however, we need not and do not decide whether
 that immunity must be absolute, or instead whether a presumptive immunity is sufficient.
 A
 Article II of the Constitution provides that “[t]he executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United
 States of America.” §1, cl. 1. The President’s duties are of
 “unrivaled gravity and breadth.” Trump v. Vance, 591 U. S.
 786, 800 (2020). They include, for instance, commanding
 the Armed Forces of the United States; granting reprieves
 and pardons for offenses against the United States; and appointing public ministers and consuls, the Justices of this
 Court, and Officers of the United States. See §2. He also
 has important foreign relations responsibilities: making
 treaties, appointing ambassadors, recognizing foreign governments, meeting foreign leaders, overseeing international diplomacy and intelligence gathering, and managing
 matters related to terrorism, trade, and immigration. See
 §§2, 3. Domestically, he must “take Care that the Laws be
 faithfully executed,” §3, and he bears responsibility for the 
 Cite as: 603 U. S. ____ (2024) 7
 Opinion of the Court
 actions of the many departments and agencies within the
 Executive Branch. He also plays a role in lawmaking by
 recommending to Congress the measures he thinks wise
 and signing or vetoing the bills Congress passes. See Art.
 I, §7, cl. 2; Art. II, §3.
 No matter the context, the President’s authority to act
 necessarily “stem[s] either from an act of Congress or from
 the Constitution itself.” Youngstown, 343 U. S., at 585. In
 the latter case, the President’s authority is sometimes “conclusive and preclusive.” Id., at 638 (Jackson, J., concurring). When the President exercises such authority, he may
 act even when the measures he takes are “incompatible
 with the expressed or implied will of Congress.” Id., at 637.
 The exclusive constitutional authority of the President “disabl[es] the Congress from acting upon the subject.” Id., at
 637–638. And the courts have “no power to control [the
 President’s] discretion” when he acts pursuant to the powers invested exclusively in him by the Constitution. Marbury, 1 Cranch, at 166.
 

 8 TRUMP v. UNITED STATES
 Opinion of the Court
 (1872). But in 1870, Congress enacted a provision that prohibited using the President’s pardon as evidence of restoration of property rights. Id., at 143–144. Chief Justice
 Chase held the provision unconstitutional because it “impair[ed] the effect of a pardon, and thus infring[ed] the constitutional power of the Executive.” Id., at 147. “To the
 executive alone is intrusted the power of pardon,” and the
 “legislature cannot change the effect of such a pardon any
 more than the executive can change a law.” Id., at 147–148.
 The President’s authority to pardon, in other words, is “conclusive and preclusive,” “disabling the Congress from acting
 upon the subject.” Youngstown, 343 U. S., at 637–638
 (Jackson, J., concurring).
 Some of the President’s other constitutional powers also
 fit that description. “The President’s power to remove—and
 thus supervise—those who wield executive power on his behalf,” for instance, “follows from the text of Article II.” Seila
 Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 591
 U. S. 197, 204 (2020). We have thus held that Congress
 lacks authority to control the President’s “unrestricted
 power of removal” with respect to “executive officers of the
 United States whom he has appointed.” Myers v. United
 States, 272 U. S. 52, 106, 176 (1926); see Youngstown, 343
 U. S., at 638, n. 4 (Jackson, J., concurring) (citing the President’s “exclusive power of removal in executive agencies”
 as an example of “conclusive and preclusive” constitutional
 authority); cf. Seila Law, 591 U. S., at 215 (noting only “two
 exceptions to the President’s unrestricted removal power”).
 The power “to control recognition determinations” of foreign
 countries is likewise an “exclusive power of the President.”
 Zivotofsky v. Kerry, 576 U. S. 1, 32 (2015). Congressional
 commands contrary to the President’s recognition determinations are thus invalid. Ibid.