Passed following an address by Ukraine’s leader and signed into the law in January 2023, the Justice for Victims of War Crimes Act authorizes the U.S. Justice Department to prosecute foreign nationals in the United States who are suspected of war crimes, even if the victims were not Americans, or the crimes were committed abroad. This blog post covers the legislation’s changes from its predecessor before discussing its significance in expanding U.S. prosecutorial power over international war crimes.
 

 On January 5, 2023, U.S. President Joe Biden signed into law the Justice for Victims of War Crimes Act, after it was introduced three months into the Russian invasion of Ukraine. This law expands the scope of federal prosecution power for international war crimes by authorizing the U.S. Department of Justice to prosecute suspected war criminals who are in the United States, regardless of the nationality of the victim or the perpetrator, or where the crime was committed. The unanimous and speedy Congressional approval of the bill came one day after Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy’s joint address to the Congress, where he condemned the atrocities committed by President Vladimir Putin’s Russia and appealed for bipartisan support for his country.
 

 

 

 History of U.S. Prosecution Over War Crimes
 

 This law marks an important expansion of the U.S. prosecutorial power over international war crimes. Its predecessor, the War Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 2441), was signed into law in 1996 by President Bill Clinton and allowed the prosecution of war crime offenses committed anywhere, whether inside or outside of the United States if the victim or offender was a U.S. national or service member. This meant that war crimes committed outside of the United States against non-U.S. citizens were not justiciable in the United States, even if the perpetrators were residing in the country. Under the former law, Russian troops in Ukraine, committing war crimes against Ukrainians, would have been able to evade prosecution for their crimes abroad, even if they were to enter the United States. This limited jurisdiction effectively rendered the 1996 law a “dead letter” law, as there was not a single prosecution based on the statute in the 26 years since its enactment. 
 

 

 

 Instead, the United States has only been able to resort to its immigration and counterterrorism laws to bring forward charges against those suspected of war crimes. Notably, the man known as the “General Dragon Master,” accused of committing atrocities during the Second Liberian Civil War, was only charged with using a fraudulently-obtained immigration document instead of being held accountable for his war crimes. Similarly, a federal judge was only able to sentence a commander of the Dos Erres Massacre Squad under charges of naturalization fraud rather than the atrocities he committed. The loopholes embedded in the 1996 War Crimes Act have essentially allowed these individuals to treat the United States as a safe haven where they can live and travel without the threat of domestic prosecution.  
 

 

 

 Changes and Developments Under the New War Crimes Act
 

 The new law closes the legal loophole under the former War Crimes Act by broadening federal jurisdiction over alleged war criminals regardless of their nationality or the location of the offenses, as long as they are located within U.S. territory. This would allow the United States to prosecute war crimes committed in Ukraine if the perpetrators were to enter the country and sufficient evidence is gathered to support an indictment. The expanded jurisdiction may be particularly poignant in the possible scenarios in modern warfare where non-Americans belonging to military groups or contractors may be based in the United States while orchestrating, directing or aiding in the commission of war crimes overseas.