Restless Legs Syndrome
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) causes an unpleasant prickling or
tingling in the legs, especially in the calves, that is relieved by moving or massaging them. People who have RLS feel a need to stretch
or move their legs to get rid of the uncomfortable or painful feelings.
As a result, it may be difficult to fall asleep and stay asleep. One or
both legs may be affected. Some people also feel the sensations in
their arms. These sensations also can occur when lying down or
sitting for long periods of time, such as while at a desk, riding in a
car, or watching a movie.
Many people who have RLS also have brief limb movements during
sleep, often with abrupt onset, occurring every 5–90 seconds. This
condition, known as periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS), can
repeatedly awaken people who have RLS, reducing their total sleep
time and interrupting their sleep. Some people have PLMS but have
no abnormal sensations in their legs while awake.
RLS affects 5–15 percent of Americans, and its prevalence increases
with age. RLS occurs more often in women than men. One study
found that RLS accounted for one-third of the insomnia seen in
patients older than age 60. Children also can have RLS. In children,
the condition may be associated with symptoms of attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder. However, it’s not fully known how the
disorders are related. Sometimes “growing pains” can be mistaken
for RLS.
RLS is often inherited. Pregnancy, kidney failure, and anemia
related to iron or vitamin deficiency can trigger or worsen RLS
symptoms. Researchers suspect that these conditions cause an iron
deficiency that results in a lack of dopamine, which is used by the
brain to control physical sensation and limb movements. Doctors
usually can diagnose RLS by patients’ symptoms and a telltale
worsening of symptoms at night or while at rest. Some doctors may
order a blood test to check ferretin levels (ferretin is a form of iron).
Doctors also may ask people who have RLS to spend a night in a
sleep laboratory, where they are monitored to rule out other sleep
disorders and to document the excessive limb movements.
RLS is treatable but not always curable. Dramatic improvements
are seen quickly when patients are given dopamine-like drugs or
iron supplements. Alternatively, people who have milder cases may
be treated successfully with sedatives or behavioral strategies. These
Common Sleep Disorders
48 Your Guide to Healthy Sleep








n	
strategies include stretching, taking a hot bath, or massaging the legs
before bedtime. Avoiding caffeinated beverages also can help reduce
symptoms, and certain medications (e.g., some antidepressants,
particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) may cause RLS.
If iron or vitamin deficiency underlies RLS, symptoms may improve
with prescribed iron, vitamin B12, or folate supplements. Some
people may require anticonvulsant medications to control the
creeping and crawling sensations in their limbs. Others who have
severe symptoms that are associated with another medical disorder
or that do not respond to normal treatments may need to be treated
with pain relievers.
Narcolepsy
Narcolepsy’s main symptom is extreme and overwhelming daytime
sleepiness, even after adequate nighttime sleep. In addition,
nighttime sleep may be fragmented by frequent awakenings. People
who have narcolepsy often fall asleep at inappropriate times and
places. Although TV sitcoms occasionally feature these individuals
to generate a few laughs, narcolepsy is no laughing matter. People
who have narcolepsy experience daytime “sleep attacks” that last
from seconds to more than one-half hour, can occur without
warning, and may cause injury. These embarrassing sleep spells also
can make it difficult to work and to maintain normal personal or
social relationships.
With narcolepsy, the usually sharp distinctions between being asleep
and awake are blurred. Also, people who have narcolepsy tend to
fall directly into dream-filled REM sleep, rather than enter REM
sleep gradually after passing through the non-REM sleep stages first.
In addition to overwhelming daytime sleepiness, narcolepsy has
three other commonly associated symptoms, but these may not
occur in all people:
Sudden muscle weakness (cataplexy). This weakness is similar
to the paralysis that normally occurs during REM sleep, but it
lasts a few seconds to minutes while an individual is awake.
Cataplexy tends to be triggered by sudden emotional reactions, such as anger, surprise, fear, or laughter. The weakness
may show up as limpness at the neck, buckling of the knees,
or sagging facial muscles affecting speech, or it may cause a
complete body collapse.
49 Common Sleep Disorders
At first, I was misdiagnosed with chronic
fatigue syndrome, because I was in my
forties and narcolepsy symptoms usually
start during the teen years. Because
I didn’t have any of the symptoms of
chronic fatigue syndrome other than
sleepiness, I went to a neurologist for
help. He noticed the cataplexy (muscle
weakness) right away, and then I
was officially diagnosed with
narcolepsy and then later
on with borderline sleep
apnea.
“Even though there is no
cure for narcolepsy, you
can feel like you have control if
you manage it well.
“When you have narcolepsy, you live
your life differently. But with a good
plan and supportive friends and family,
it all turns out OK.
SZE-PING
“
”
50 Your Guide to Healthy Sleep
n	
n	






Sleep paralysis. People who have narcolepsy may experience
a temporary inability to talk or move when falling asleep or
waking up, as if they were glued to their beds.
Vivid dreams. These dreams can occur when people who
have narcolepsy first fall asleep or wake up. The dreams are
so lifelike that they can be confused with reality.
Experts estimate that as many as 350,000 Americans have narcolepsy, but fewer than 50,000 are diagnosed. The disorder may be as
widespread as Parkinson’s disease or multiple sclerosis, and more
prevalent than cystic fibrosis, but it is less well known. Narcolepsy
is often mistaken for depression, epilepsy, or the side
effects of medicines.
Narcolepsy can be difficult to diagnose in people
who have only the symptom of excessive daytime
sleepiness. It is usually diagnosed during an
overnight sleep recording (PSG) that is followed
by an MSLT. (See “How Are Sleep Disorders
Diagnosed?” on page 44.) Both tests reveal
symptoms of narcolepsy—the tendency to
fall asleep rapidly and enter REM sleep
early, even during brief naps.
Narcolepsy can develop at any age, but
the symptoms tend to appear first during
adolescence or early adulthood. About 1
of every 10 people who have narcolepsy
has a close family member who has the
disorder, suggesting that one can inherit
a tendency to develop narcolepsy.
Studies suggest that a substance in the
brain called hypocretin plays a key
role in narcolepsy. Most people who
have narcolepsy lack hypocretin, which
promotes wakefulness. Scientists believe that
an autoimmune reaction—perhaps triggered
by disease, viral illness, or brain injury—
specifically destroys the hypocretin-generating
cells in the brains of people who have
narcolepsy.
51





Eventually, researchers may develop a treatment for narcolepsy that
restores hypocretin to normal levels. In the meantime, most people
who have narcolepsy find some to all of their symptoms relieved by
various drug treatments. For example, central nervous system
stimulants can reduce daytime sleepiness. Antidepressants and other
drugs that suppress REM sleep can prevent muscle weakness, sleep
paralysis, and vivid dreaming. Doctors also usually recommend that
people who have narcolepsy take short naps (10–15 minutes) two or
three times a day, if possible, to help control excessive daytime
sleepiness. 