The origin of forensic medicine remains lost in a distant past, whenever the principles of medical sciences met those of law and justice (1,2). Perhaps it began with the Code of Hammurabi (1792–1750 BCE), which imposed sanctions for errors in medical and surgical practices. The same type of punishment also existed in Persia. Later on, the Visigoths promulgated laws that punished poisoning, infanticide, and homicide. Described as a medical trunk that serves the administration of justice, forensic medicine has different branches. Forensic pathology is probably the most emblematic one. Known in many Latin countries as tanathology (from the Greek word thanatos, meaning “death’s god”), definitions of forensic pathology are often so broad that they would fit better into forensic medicine as a whole than in this single branch. For Di Maio (3), it is “a branch of medicine that applies the principles and knowledge of the medical sciences in the field of law.” An even larger conception of forensic pathology (4) considers it the study of diseases and injuries of the community, because it involves the knowledge of diagnosis and treatment in every medical specialty, but also requires information in many nonmedical areas, such as chemistry, physics, criminalistics and police sciences, motor vehicle and highway conception, politics, sociology, and even the way of life of a society. Closer to its objectives and limits, Williams et al. (5) define forensic pathology as a specialized branch of pathology (pathology being the study by scientific methods of disease and tissue injury) that relates within a legal framework to the effects of trauma, poisoning, occupational hazards, and natural disease. Introduction to Forensic Medicine 15 Forensic dissections of bodies began in the 13th century at the University of Bologna in Italy by a surgeon and teacher of anatomy, Saliceto (6). Surprisingly, these forensic dissections appeared before the hospital autopsies that started by the end of the 19th century with Rokitansky, Virchow, and the advent of the pathogenesis of diseases and cellular pathology (6). However, some authors (7) consider the French surgeon Ambrosio Paré, who in 1575 began a real scientific period in France, the father of legal medicine. This paternity is divided with Zacchia, the Pope’s physician, who taught in Italy and wrote in 1601 what can be considered the first medicolegal textbook (7). This was of decisive influence on the development of forensic sciences, as were the European codes of the 16th century (6): the Bamberg Code in 1507 and especially the Caroline Code in 1532, which obliged the courts to call specialized doctors to clarify forensic questions. Nevertheless, the 19th century was indeed a reference for modern legal medicine, born formally in many countries, almost at the same time: 1855 in Austria (6), 1872 in Hungary (8), 1886 in Brazil (7), 1887 in Great Britain (9,10), and 1889 in Portugal (when legal medicine was first referred to as being legally organized [11]). This century was really a golden age for forensic medicine (1,11), which knew a quick but supported growth, especially in France, Italy, and Germany (11). Besides, in German countries, forensic matters were always carefully treated, as can be proved by the early beginning of teaching forensic medicine in some universities in 1720 (11). The posterior development of forensic pathology was processed in accordance with the legal systems and sociopolitical conditions of each country. At the end of the 19th century, complementary sciences, such as toxicology and histology, were aggregate to forensic pathology, and from that union resulted the constitution of legal medicine institutes similar to the medicolegal units known today, where every type of expertise related to justice may be executed.
Later, in the second half of the 20th century, a new medicolegal problem
arose in Europe and wherever roads and cars existed. The traffic accidents
and the necessity of civil litigations of the injuries of the victims led to a new
medicolegal subspecialty concerning living people: clinical forensic medicine. It started in Belgium and France with Derobert, Roche, Muller, and
Rousseau (12). Supported by the Deliberation 75 (7) of the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe, an “expertise-type” was created (12,13)
to achieve a global evaluation of consequences resulting from injuries caused
by accidents to the body of an individual (as a whole being). This process was
crucial for the financial indemnity of the injuries by insurance companies.
These ideas, adopted in Portugal by Oliveira Sá, a great enthusiast of this new
16 Pinheiro
discipline, were developed and “exported” to Spain through the excellent relationship he had with the forensic physicians in the neighbor country, where a
huge development took place; however, it was more as a private medical
activity than centralized in medicolegal institutions. The popularity of this
new forensic area increased quickly because of the growing number of traffic
accidents in the world. Once the Iberian Peninsula was “conquered,” the area
extended to South and Latin America. The English-speaking countries were
the last to develop this new specialty; it has been only within the last several
years that the popularity of clinical forensic medicine has exploded in the
United States and the United Kingdom.