Internal environment of Nintendo
(1) Analysis of Nintendo's advantages
Competitive advantage refers to an enterprise's ability to outperform its competitors, which helps
to achieve its main goal -- profit. Nintendo's strengths lie in the following ways [3]. Nintendo has
developed a unique profit distribution system based on its nearly 50 years of experience in the game
industry. At that time, the manager in charge of Nintendo drew lessons from the "collapse of Atari".
First, he set up a "Mario Club" game quality supervision agency to strictly screen the game software
on the Nintendo game console. Later, he set up a "royalty system" and formulated a set of rules for
game review, platform access, and game revenue sharing, which brought huge profits to Nintendo,
At the same time, it objectively promoted the benign development of the Japanese game industry at
that time. These systems are also the internal reason why the overall quality of Nintendo Switch
games is much better than its competitors. Super big IPs such as Super Mario and Legend of Zelda
have always maintained a good reputation and remain popular among players. It is these unique
systems that enable Nintendo to maintain a high-profit margin even in the context of economic
depression [4].
(2) Analysis of Nintendo's disadvantages
First, Nintendo's failed family business management style. The presidents of Nintendo's Japanese
and American divisions (NOA) often have differences due to huge differences in management
methods, and the consequences of such differences are devastating because they will lead to key
employees becoming vulnerable and even leaving to do other work. Therefore, the family business
management model seriously leads to the failure of efficient cooperation between Nintendo's various
branches, and will also seriously harm Nintendo's external reputation and damage Nintendo's overall
interests [5].
Secondly, weak technology research and development capability. With the growing demand for
personalized service, companies are required to provide increasingly specialized service strategies
and differentiated solutions, for example, more and more game companies begin to focus on creating
products with local characteristics based on the language and cultural background of different regions,
which is also the basis for a game to be promoted around the world. In addition, the development of
modern games also needs the support of technological innovation. For example, more and more VR,
AR, and motion capture games are emerging in the market. It would be unthinkable for Nintendo to
spend huge resources on a new generation of high-performance consoles to compete with SONY.
Conversely, it is in the area of research and development that Nintendo's other rival, Microsoft, has
the greatest advantage.
3.3.2 External environment of Nintendo
(1) Opportunity for Nintendo
In terms of technology and business environment, Nintendo has much more experience than its
competitors with the background of years of exploration in the gaming industry. Even though
Microsoft recently acquired the game giant Blizzard, it intends to expand its market share in the game
industry. However, Microsoft did not intervene in Blizzard's daily operation, which was also due to
its limited experience in the game industry. These factors can also reduce Nintendo's competitive
pressure [6].
In terms of the political and legal environment, the government's favorable policies also help game
companies expand their overseas markets. Also, under the catalysis of the epidemic economy, video
games have become one of the most popular cultural and creative activities for young people in the
world. Many governments are aware of this trend and have introduced a series of supportive policies,
such as setting up special funds for the game industry; Promise the game developer that adding
landmark landmarks in the game can get financial support and tax concessions. These policies are
good news for multinational game companies like Nintendo to expand their overseas markets.
(2) Threat for Nintendo
Highlights in Business, Economics and Management FMIBM 2023
Volume 10 (2023)
194
Microsoft's strong economic strength enables them to continue to operate in the gaming industry
after experiencing the cost of failure in the game product competition of 4 billion dollars and make
up for the shortcomings of their predecessors in new products. At the same time, Microsoft could use
money offensive to buy third-party platform certification. Finally, and most importantly, Microsoft's
latest games are coming out one year earlier than Nintendo's or SONY's, making it harder for
Nintendo to time and win the market.
4. Nintendo’s market strategy suggestion
As the gaming industry continues to evolve, scholars generally agree that gaming companies need
not only excellent hardware and software technology but also effective marketing strategies. Schilling
MA (2003) believes that if companies in the game industry want to maintain their market share, they
need to improve their marketing strategies to follow or even guide the market trend [7]. Marchand A
and Hennig-Thurau T (2013) think that companies in the game industry need to pay attention to
consumers' preferences in the market, understand consumers' needs in the form of questionnaires, etc.,
to design their products in a targeted way [8]. SC Jain (1989) thinks that companies in the game
industry need to pay attention to consumers' preferences in the market, understand consumers' needs
in the form of questionnaires, etc., to design their products in a targeted way [9]. Based on the above
analysis of Nintendo's internal and external conditions, this report proposes the following
improvement suggestions [10].
Nintendo could consider setting up more offline experience stores overseas. Nintendo's classic
game characters, such as Mario, Pokemon, Kirby, and Link, are familiar to the public. Taking these
characters as ambassadors of offline experience stores, they can attract enough attention without too
much publicity expenses and are very attractive to children and adults.
Nintendo could consider adding episode-by-episode, level-by-level incrementally unlocked
purchases. Because Nintendo's software games are priced in a complementary way to the console's
price, they are generally priced higher than other games in the market. This can lead to players who
want to play a game but don't buy it because the price is too high. In this case, the buy-out system can
be supplemented with the option of gradually unlocking purchases by episode or level, and players
can choose to buy them out or buy them separately. That way, players can play more games, and
buying incrementally doesn't feel like a buy-out. This is also a great way for Nintendo to increase its
sales.
Nintendo could increase its ban on cracking consoles and develop new encryption technologies.
For now, Nintendo's crackdown on cracked consoles is not strong enough, and only users who use
cracked consoles to connect to the Internet have been blocked. In this case, to protect their intellectual
property rights, but also promote the sale of their legitimate games, the development of a new set of
encryption technology is worth considering.