After the Second World War, Hokkaido drew up 6 Development Plans. These Plans showed the basic development concept and direction. Based on that, important large scale infrastructure projects such as roads, harbors, rail ways, air ports and large scale industrial parks were projected. Then necessary investment amount and their economic and social effects on Hokkaido region were calculated. The Plans were finally decided by the Cabinet after the discussions in Hokkaido Development Council which is operated by Hokkaido Development Agency (now Ministry of Infrastructure, Land and Transport). 

Targets and contents of the Plans were changed according to the changes of global and Japanese economic situation and Hokkaido’s development stage. The basic development strategy of Hokkaido was to utilize and develop the remaining rich natural resources and support settlement of the people safely and happily. At the first stage just after the war, Hokkaido was expected to become a base of supplying foodstuffs and to accept growing and returning population from former overseas territories. Then later, various large infrastructure projects were planed and implemented for developing her economy and now-a-days development of Hokkaido’s identities has come to be emphasized, such as remaining natural beauty, her northern location and cultural heritages.

Today, through the 6 Development Plans, Hokkaido, which has 22% of total Japanese territory but only 4.5% population is enjoying well developed infrastructure compared with other regions. But from the view point of industrial structure, it is still biased to natural resources supply industry. Manufacturing industry has not been developed enough yet. For instance, share of manufacturing industries in the total Hokkaido GDP is less than 10%, compared with more than 20% of Japanese average. More over if we see her manufacturing sector’s structure, in 2005 food processing industry dominated, and share of assembly industry is only 12%, compared with 48% in Japanese average.

So far, the basic development strategy for Hokkaido has been characterized by heavy
infrastructure investment. It has developed excessive construction industry and they have come to require continuous infrastructure investment. And this situation could not give a good condition for diversifying its industrial structure.

Now Hokkaido has faced with the problems decreasing natural forestry and fishery resources. And there are many impoverishing areas which used to depend on coal mine industry. This change of the basic economic and social condition has to be considered in the future program of Hokkaido development.

As for fishery industry, 200 mile economic zone system was introduced internationally in 1976. After that, Japanese northern sea fishery, which was used to be main profit sources for Hokkaido fishery industry, was damaged greatly. In the case of coal industry, since around 1960’s, energy revolution progressed rapidly and the shift from coal to oil as energy source happened. Then the important industrial sector, coal industry in Hokkaido started to decline. Hokkaido used to produce 20 million tons of coal annually but in 2002 the last coal mine was closed and the history of coal producing industry in Hokkaido was finished. Some areas, where depended on coal industry were greatly affected by closing mines and still have struggled with their economic decline and collapsing communities.

As for the agricultural products, Hokkaido is ranked as No.1 producing place for many products in Japan. Even such situation, global competition has been getting severe and has required the efforts to differentiate them from foreign and other regions’ products.

Now Hokkaido’s main development strategy seems to promote the change of her industrial
structure to more advanced and high value added ones by not only inviting outside capitals but also fostering indigenous companies. Also, new type tourism industry becomes one of the important target to be promoted. However under the long lasted economic recession, Hokkaido’s regional economy has been weakened and financial condition of many local self-governments is facing with very critical conditions.