2.2.2 ISO MODEL The International Standards Organization (ISO), based in Geneva Switzerland, is composed of groups for various countries that set standards working towards the establishment of world-wide standards for communication and data exchange. One notable accomplishment has been the development of a reference model that contains specifications for a network architecture for connecting dissimilar computers, with a main goal being that of producing an open and non-proprietary method of data communication. This reference model, called the Open Systems Interconnect Reference Model (OSI RM), was developed in 1981 (?) and revised in 1984. The OSI RM uses 7 layers, each independent of each other, to allow computers to exchange data. To transfer a message from user A to user B, the data has to pass through the 7 layers on user's A machine, before being transmitted through the selected medium. At the receiving computer of user B, the data must then pass through the 7 layers again, this time in reverse sequence, before being received by user B. For data to be transferred, it must pass through all 7 layers on both computers. Each layer follows a relatively strict specification and this allows the differing layers to be produced and implemented by different concerns. Each layer can then interface with its neighboring layers even though they may have been developed by different groups. One way of viewing the activities of the layers is that as the original message passes down the layers towards the medium on the computer of user A, additional information, for both formatting or addressing information, is added to the beginning or end of the message. The additional information is added to ensure correct communication. At the other end (i.e. at user B) this information is gradually stripped off at the data passes through the 7 layers - this time in reverse order. The layers are arranged in order as follows: Layer 7, Application Layer. This layer defines network applications such as error recovery, flow control and network access. Note that user applications are not part of the layers. Layer 6, Presentation Layer. This layer determines the format used to exchange data in such aspects as data translation, encryption and protocol conversion. The data from user A is translated to a common syntax that can be understood by user B. In this way it specifies how applications can connect to the network and to user B. Layer 5, Session Layer. This layer controls the communication session between computers. It is responsible for establishing and removing communication sessions between computers. Additional address translations and security are also performed. This layer therefore instigates a data transfer session between user A and user B so that an extended data transfer can take place. Layer 4, Transport Layer. This layer is responsible for ensuring that data is delivered free of error and provides some flow control. This layer ensures that data is transferred as part of the session instigated by the Session Layer. Layer 3, Network Layer. This layer handles the delivery of data by determining the route for the information to follow. The data is divided into packets with addressing information attached. It also translates address from names into numbers. Intermediate addresses are also attached. Layer 2, Data Link Layer. This layer defines the network control mechanism and prepares the packets for transmission. Layer 1, Physical Layer. This layer is concerned with the transmission of binary data between stations and defines the connections. The connection definition includes such aspects as mechanical, electrical,, topology and bandwidth aspects. At the receiving end the process is reversed so that the binary data that is received is translated back into the original message for User B. Note that each layer communicates only with it's immediate neighbors. For example the Transport Layer only communicates with the Session Layer and with the Network Layer. Each network architecture can be defined by a set of protocols for each of the layers. This allows for a degree of simplification and modularity in design. In spite of an enormous amount of worked and effort having been expended on the ISO RM, very little of it is in use compared to TCP/IP (described in the following section). Perhaps one reason is that the OSI RM is Internet Technologies Overview Page 2-3 extremely complex and it takes a long time to implement all the functions. However a more likely reason is that TCP/IP is in widespread use and has preempted much of the work on implementing the OSI RM. 2.2.3 TCP/IP The Internet grew out of the Cold War in the 1960s as a response to the issue of making sure that computer networks could survive a nuclear weapons attack. The problem was that a nuclear war could destroy much of the military communications and computer networks and that military control would then be lost. An approach was therefore needed whereby the networks could operate even when substantive portions had been destroyed. A number of possible network structures were proposed, with most using analogue approaches with relatively sophisticated mechanisms for making sure that network connections were maintained. Such approaches were difficult to implement effectively since all possible scenarios of damage to the network had to be preprogrammed into the network control algorithms. This structure was unwieldy and it was difficult to make changes to the network. Also proposed, but not implemented at that time, was the structure that was to form the basis of the Internet. This approach was based on a simple and elegant digital model of a very decentralized network and is described in more detail below. Such a network is digital in nature and was therefore dependent on readily available computing power. Such power was becoming available in the 1970s and it was then that the University of California at Berkeley received a contract from the United States Department of Defense to develop a computer network that would: 1. Operate on a wide variety of computer hardware with differing communications media 2. Reconfigure itself if portions of the network failed The earlier proposed network of data packets being directed by routers was implemented under this contract in a network structure formulated as a series of protocols which are described under the general heading of Transmission Control Protocol and Internet Protocol (TCP/IP). TCP/IP is described in more detail later. 
2.2.5 TCP/IP STRUCTURE TCP/IP consists of a whole series of protocols, applications and services that together support the powerful capabilities of Internet technologies. Whereas the OSI RM has seven layers the TCP/IP can be thought of as consisting of five layers: The application layer containing such protocols and applications as Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMPT), File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and Telnet. The transport layer contains such protocols as Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). The Internet layer contains such protocols as Internet Protocol (IP), Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), and Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) The data link layer and The physical layer handle the hardware connections. A wide variety of hardware network connections are possible ranging from token ring to Ethernet and from twisted pair cables to fiber optic cables. As with the OSI RM, each message that is being transmitted must be passed down through the layers to the hardware, while the reverse happens on the receiving machine. Another way of looking at the TCP/IP set is to categorize it into upper layers (the application layer) midlayers (the transport and Internet layer) and into lower layers (the data link and physical layers). The upper layers handle the applications, while the lower layers handle the hardware connections. The mid-layers form the core of TCP/IP. Note that not all protocols, applications and services are used on all sessions, rather each can be used under particular scenarios. For example TCP/IP is often combined with Ethernet for a specific hardware implementation. Ethernet is a protocol for the data link and physical layers that uses carrier-sense multipleaccess with collision detection (CSMA-CD). It is simple to install and is available for a wide range of computer hardware. An arrangement such as TCP/IP with Ethernet (with twisted pair cables) therefore covers the mid and lower layers. Alternatively TCP/IP may connect to a token ring network where transmission is only allowed if the node has a token passed to it from another node on the network. In this case the data link and physical layers of the TCP/IP protocol suite are concerned with the interface to the token ring network. It should be noted that this modular approach allows for a wide variety of configurations to be possible. Ironically, the modular approach also allows for the use of Internet technologies that address the upper layers (such as WWW browsers) to use non-TCP/IP networks (Novell networks as an example).