A Cautionary Tale of Drone (Mis)use
Military-grade drones were a restricted technology until local 
government agencies saw drones’ potential for search-and-rescue missions 
and private companies wanted to use drones for labor-intensive tasks, 
such as inspecting pipelines, delivering goods to remote areas, 
and spraying pesticides on farms. 22 The exploitation of drones 
for commercial profit soon created a civilian drone industry wherein 
the United States alone currently contains some 727,000 commercial 
drones and 1.69 million recreational small drones, with the numbers 
forecast to continue growing.23 The drone industry’s growth has taken 
place in the last few years, as the Federal Aviation Administration, 
concerned more with air safety than terrorist ambitions, did not issue 
the first commercial drone permit until 2006, lifting some of the 
restrictions on flying consumer drones for recreational and business purposes.
Even then, the authorities were aware that , as Don Rassler has documented, 
four terrorist groups—the Japanese Aum Shinrikyo, the Colombia-based 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, the Pakistan-based Lashkar-eTaiba, and the Haqqani network—were already exploring the use of unmanned 
aerial vehicles for terrorist attacks. The Lashkar-e-Taiba case involved 
a network of US residents who directly acquired sensitive technology 
from US companies in 2002 to enhance the performance of unmanned 
airplanes. Lashkar-e-Taiba intended to ship the technologies, 
which US companies could sell to domestic customers—mainly 
universities and the US government—without due diligence, for the 
group’s military use in Kashmir. Several other terrorist groups also had 
their own drone programs, adapting Iranian models or reverse 
engineering stolen military drones—initially, for surveillance and the 
collection of tactical intelligence, external communications, and the 
smuggling of materiel into denied areas, and then, for use as weapons.24
Perhaps more interesting are the creative uses of drones individuals 
with no terrorist intent have found but that may cause harm, nonetheless. 
In December 2008, an American hobbyist successfully attached a pistol 
with a digital-camera gunsight to a minicopter and remotely fired 
the pistol. The hobbyist filmed his stunt and posted the footage online. 
The video did not attract much media attention, but almost seven years 
later, another American, a teenager, “upped the ante and the shock 
value” by mounting a homemade flamethrower to a small commercial drone 
he had modified and displaying the accuracy of the weapon in an online video.25 Violent actors easily could have replicated both stunts to stage 
terrorist attacks.
Even after the hobbyists’ stunts, several influential studies considered 
terrorists’ use of drones a “niche threat” because few terrorist groups had 
successfully deployed drones in any meaningful way.26 When the Islamic 
State of Iraq and Syria began weaponizing civilian drones and filming its 
attacks for propaganda purposes in 2016, several terrorism experts warned 
violent extremists could one day use drones as remote-controlled missiles to 
deliver unconventional weapons, such as deadly nerve agents.27 Meanwhile, the 
general consensus remained that though drones might complicate conflicts, 
drones’ broader impact would be limited, given their small payloads, 
short flight times, and susceptibility to disruption. Additionally, although 
technological advancements might make civilian drones more capable, 
“the tools to counter, disable or defeat [drones] will be more capable too,” 
as will regulatory changes to restrict airspace access and increase export 
controls to prevent terrorists from acquiring certain technologies.28
Today, many governments require registrations for consumer drones 
that are heavier than seven kilograms. In addition, most governments 
have banned consumer drones from flying in cities, near sensitive installations, 
and over iconic events and other large gatherings, except with special 
permits. Since those with malevolent intentions usually do not apply 
for permits, jamming devices have also proliferated, as have geofencing 
technologies for disabling drones that are approaching designated no-fly zones. 
Nonetheless, the Houthis’ recent success in disrupting the Red 
Sea shipping route will likely inspire copycats. The Strait of Malacca, 
for instance, is another global trade route with several choke points. 
Any threat to shipping in this narrow channel bordered by Indonesia, 
Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand will severely impact economies 
in East Asia and cause ripple effects throughout the rest of the world.
Weaponized drones will be a game changer for Southeast Asian 
terrorist groups. During the siege of Marawi City, Philippines, in June 2017, 
pro–Islamic State of Iraq and Syria militants reportedly used consumer-grade 
quadcopter drones to track, evade, and coordinate attacks 
on Philippine soldiers, inspiring the Philippine military to use similar 
drones. 29 But regional authorities apparently judged the drone use 
in Marawi City to be an outlier, a tactic imported by foreign fighters. 
The prevailing assessment is Southeast Asian terrorist groups like 
Jemaah Islamiyah and the various pro–Islamic State of Iraq and Syria offshoots in Indonesia and Malaysia will not expend their limited resources 
on drones when the supply of suicide bombers is seemingly 
unlimited. The use of drones for terrorist attacks is nevertheless 
a growing concern in Southeast Asia. Recent developments indicate 
Indonesian terrorists are hoping to acquire drone-warfare capability. 
In May 2023, the Indonesian counterterrorism unit Densus 88 obtained 
intelligence that Indonesian nationals whom the unit suspected of being 
affiliated with al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula were undergoing 
training to fly drones in Yemen. Individuals affiliated with pro–Islamic 
State of Iraq and Syria militant factions were also sharing tutorials 
on how to make “drone bombs” with members of their private social-media 
chat groups.