Credit Risk
For most banks, loans are the largest and most obvious source of credit risk.
However, there are other pockets of credit risk both on and off the balance
sheet, such as the investment portfolio, overdrafts, and letters of credit. Many
products, activities, and services, such as derivatives, foreign exchange, and
cash management services, also expose a bank to credit risk.
The risk of repayment, i.e., the possibility that an obligor will fail to perform
as agreed, is either lessened or increased by a bank’s credit risk management
practices. A bank’s first defense against excessive credit risk is the initial
credit-granting process − sound underwriting standards, an efficient, balanced
Loan Portfolio Management 5 Comptroller’s Handbook
approval process, and a competent lending staff. Because a bank cannot
easily overcome borrowers with questionable capacity or character, these
factors exert a strong influence on credit quality. Borrowers whose financial
performance is poor or marginal, or whose repayment ability is dependent
upon unproven projections can quickly become impaired by personal or
external economic stress. Management of credit risk, however, must continue
after a loan has been made, for sound initial credit decisions can be
undermined by improper loan structuring or inadequate monitoring.
Traditionally, banks have focused on oversight of individual loans in
managing their overall credit risk. While this focus is important, banks
should also view credit risk management in terms of portfolio segments and
the entire portfolio. The focus on managing individual credit risk did not
avert the credit crises of the 1980s. However, had the portfolio approach to
risk management augmented these traditional risk management practices,
banks might have at least reduced their losses.
Effective management of the loan portfolio’s credit risk requires that the board
and management understand and control the bank’s risk profile and its credit
culture. To accomplish this, they must have a thorough knowledge of the
portfolio’s composition and its inherent risks. They must understand the
portfolio’s product mix, industry and geographic concentrations, average risk
ratings, and other aggregate characteristics. They must be sure that the
policies, processes, and practices implemented to control the risks of
individual loans and portfolio segments are sound and that lending personnel
adhere to them.
Banks engaged in international lending face country risks that domestic
lenders do not. Country risk encompasses all of the uncertainties arising
from a nation’s economic, social, and political conditions that may affect the
payment of foreigners’ debt and equity investments. Country risk includes
the possibility of political and social upheaval, nationalization and
expropriation of assets, governmental repudiation of external indebtedness,
exchange controls, and currency devaluation or depreciation. Unless a
nation repudiates its external debt, these developments might not make a
loan uncollectible. However, even a delay in collection could weaken the
lending bank.
Loan Portfolio Management 6 Comptroller’s Handbook
Transfer risk, which is a narrower form of country risk, is the possibility that
an obligor will not be able to pay because the currency of payment is
unavailable. This unavailability may be a matter of government policy. For
example, although an individual borrower may be very successful and have
sufficient local currency cash flow to pay its foreign (e.g., U.S. dollar) debt,
the borrower’s country may not have sufficient U.S. dollars available to
permit repayment of the foreign indebtedness. The transfer risk associated
with banks’ exposures in foreign countries is evaluated by the Interagency
Country Exposure Review Committee (ICERC). For examination purposes,
the transfer risk rating assigned to a country by the ICERC applies to all bank
assets in that country. However, examiners may classify individual loans and
other assets more severely for credit risk reasons.
Strategies for managing country risk will be discussed in “Country Risk
Management,” a separate booklet in the Comptroller’s Handbook.
Interest Rate Risk
The level of interest rate risk attributed to the bank’s lending activities
depends on the composition of its loan portfolio and the degree to which the
terms of its loans (e.g., maturity, rate structure, embedded options) expose the
bank’s revenue stream to changes in rates.
Pricing and portfolio maturity decisions should be made with an eye to
funding costs and maturities. When significant individual credits or portfolio
segments are especially sensitive to interest rate risk, they should be
periodically stress-tested. If the asset/liability management committee
(ALCO), which typically is responsible for managing the bank’s interest rate
risk, is to manage all of the bank’s positions, it must have sufficient reports on
loan portfolio and pipeline composition and trends. These reports might
include a maturing loans report, pipeline report, and rate and repricing
report.
Banks frequently shift interest rate risk to their borrowers by structuring loans
with variable interest rates. Borrowers with marginal repayment capacity
may experience financial difficulty if the interest rates on these loans
increase. As part of the risk management process, banks should identify
borrowers whose loans have heightened sensitivity to interest rate changes
Loan Portfolio Management 7 Comptroller’s Handbook
and develop strategies to mitigate the risk. One method is to require
vulnerable borrowers to purchase interest rate protection or otherwise hedge
the risk.
The Comptroller’s Handbook booklet “Interest Rate Risk” provides guidance
on interest rate risk management.
Liquidity Risk
Because of the size of the loan portfolio, effective management of liquidity
risk requires that there be close ties to, and good information flow from, the
lending function. Obviously, loans are a primary use of funds. And while
controlling loan growth has always been a large part of liquidity
management, historically the loan portfolio has not been viewed as a
significant source of funds for liquidity management. Practices are changing,
however. Banks can use the loan portfolio as a source of funds by reducing
the total dollar volume of loans through sales, securitization, and portfolio
run-off.
In fact, banks are taking a more active role in managing their loan portfolios.
While these activities are often initiated to manage credit risk, they have also
improved liquidity. Banks increasingly are originating loans “for sale” or
securitization. Consumer loans (mortgages, instalment loans, and credit
cards) are routinely originated for immediate securitization. Many larger
banks have been expanding their underwriting for the syndicated loan
market. Additionally, banks are also expanding the packaging and sale of
distressed credits and otherwise undesirable loans.
As part of liquidity planning, a bank’s overall liquidity strategy should include
the identification of those loans or loan portfolio segments that may be easily
converted to cash. A loan’s liquidity hinges on such characteristics as its
quality, pricing, scheduled maturities, and conformity to market standards for
underwriting. Loans are also a source of liquidity when used as collateral for
borrowings. The ease with which a bank can participate or sell loans to other
lenders or investors (and the terms on which the bank can do so) will vary
with market conditions, the type of loan, and the quality of loan. Information
provided for liquidity analysis should include an assessment of these
variables under various scenarios.
Loan Portfolio Management 8 Comptroller’s Handbook
Liquidity is also affected by the amount of the bank’s commitments to lend
and the actual amount that borrowers draw against those commitments. A
bank should have systems to track commitments and borrower usage.
Knowledge of the types of commitments, deals in the pipeline, normal usage
levels, and historically high usage levels are important in assessing whether
available liquidity will be adequate for normal, seasonal, or emergency
needs. Management information systems should distinguish between
commitments that the bank is legally obligated to fund and those (guidance
or advisory lines) that it is not.
Any analysis of a bank’s ability to reduce or cut existing commitments must
consider more than its legal obligation to lend. It should also consider
reputation risk and the potential for lender-liability actions. The withdrawal
or reduction of commitments can have significant ramifications for a bank.
From a strategic perspective, any tightening of commitments may adversely
affect a bank’s ability to maintain or grow a customer base if it is perceived as
an unreliable lender in tight credit markets. A bank’s reputation may also
suffer if it is perceived as unwilling to support community credit needs.
Given these ancillary risks, bank management must carefully assess
the implications of curtailing lending lines.
