A lack of information is sometimes the cause of poor financial decisions. When one
party has more information than the other party, economists describe this imbalance
as “asymmetric information.” In the market for financial services, where the provider often knows more about the product, there is a potential risk to the consumer
and the economy. Financial education is a tool for helping individuals manage and
mitigate risk. Individuals who are better financially prepared can avoid unexpected
expenses, steer away from frauds and scams, and avoid taking on risks that they do
not understand or cannot afford to bear. By improving financial literacy and education, the federal government can play an important role in facilitating a vibrant and
efficient marketplace, which in turn empowers individuals to make informed financial decisions.
In supporting financial literacy and education, the government can create positive
spillovers (or positive externalities) from a more financially literate population. A more
informed population tends to be more productive and thus boosts economic activity.
A stronger economy can result in more jobs and higher wages for others.
Financial education can also help avoid negative spillovers (or negative externalities) from a less financially literate population. A negative externality is an economic
26. GAO, April 2014.
14 Federal Financial Literacy Reform: Coordinating and Improving Financial Literacy Efforts
activity that imposes a cost or negative impact on an unrelated third party. These negative externalities cause inefficiencies in the market.27 For example, when a borrower
with low financial literacy defaults on an ill-advised loan, the lender will bear some
of these costs. On the other hand, friends and family members, the government and
others may also bear the cost of that decision. Family members may directly help pay
off a loan, or cosign on future loans, increasing their own debt-to-income ratios. Thus,
the original two parties to the loan do not bear the entire cost of the transaction.
The financial crisis of 2007-2008 demonstrated how individuals and families with
limited financial literacy can be among those most dramatically affected by downturns
in the economy. Since Treasury’s mission includes a mandate to maintain a strong
economy “by promoting the conditions that enable economic growth and stability at
home and abroad,”28 it is important to keep in mind the role that individual financial
capability has in the prosperity and financial health of the nation.
The federal government cannot, and should not, bear the sole responsibility for ensuring the financial capability of individuals and households. Since the creation of the
FLEC, it has been clear that federal agencies are not solely, or even predominantly,
responsible for providing financial education to Americans. State and local governments, nonprofits and the private sector rightly have interests in promoting better
financial decision-making. For example, some employers view financial health similar to physical health and include this as part of their benefits package because of its
impact on their bottom line. These non-government entities are able to respond to
needs more quickly, develop customized strategies to deliver financial education, and
remain engaged and follow up with those served over time.
Given the substantial accomplishments and opportunities for improved financial education provided by various stakeholders outside of the federal government, it is appropriate to consider the suitable federal role. Treasury’s outreach to stakeholders has
revealed the desire for the federal government to play an overarching leadership and
guidance role, rather than trying to directly reach all Americans with financial education lessons. By embracing this role, the federal government can improve the quality
and reach of financial education activities by promoting best practices, sharing evidence, creating specific resources where appropriate, and deploying policy solutions
to support the U.S. financial education infrastructure. The federal government, then,
can be a partner, a source of trusted information and tools, and a leader to the many
financial education providers striving to improve financial literacy and capability of
their nation.
27. See, for example: Hastings, Justine S., Madrian, Brigitte C. and Skimmyhorn,William L. “Financial Literacy, Financial
Education and Economic Outcomes,” Annu Rev Econom. 2013 May 1; 5: 347–373, 2013, available at: https://dx.doi.
org/10.1146%2Fannurev-economics-082312-125807; Lusardi, Annamaria and Mitchell, Olivia S. “The Economic Importance of
Financial Literacy: Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature 2014, 52(1), 5-44, 2014, available at: https://www.
aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jel.52.1.5.
28. U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Role of the Treasury”, webpage, available at: https://home.treasury.gov/about/general-information/
role-of-the-treasury.
Section 1: Governance of Federal Financial Literacy and Education Efforts 15
Recommendation
Treasury recommends that the primary federal role for financial literacy and education should be to empower financial education providers as opposed to trying to
directly reach every American household. This federal role could include developing
and implementing policy, encouraging research, and other activities, including conducting financial education programs, and developing educational resources as needed
to advance best practices and standards to equip Americans with the skills, knowledge, and tools to confidently make informed financial decisions and improve their
financial well-being. The federal government should also consider the impact of the
lack of financial literacy on households and the risk to the economy from negative
externalities and market failures. Financial literacy and education should be seen as a
vehicle to guard against market failures and foster competitive markets.
Leadership and Accountability for Federal
Financial Literacy and Education
The FLEC’s structure and operations have been informal, with the Treasury providing staff support and management, including organizing public meetings, scheduling informal briefings, and managing reports to Congress and the public. While it
is clear that there is an important federal role in financial education, the structure of
financial education across the federal government has not been conducive to both
attaining measurable outcomes and coordinating activities in order to maximize the
government’s return on investment. As noted by the OMB Report and the GAO
report, financial education activities exist in many different agencies, often without a
requirement that they use or build on programs or resources already paid for by taxpayers. Congress created the FLEC with a purpose to coordinate these activities, yet
the authorities of the FLEC, as well as its structure, do not provide it with the ability to hold members accountable for coordination, efficiency or outcomes. As GAO
noted, “We acknowledge that the governance structure of the Commission presents
challenges in addressing resource issues: it relies on the consensus of multiple agencies, has no independent budget, and no legal authority to compel members to act.”29
The FLEC’s lack of clear decision-making processes and defined roles and responsibilities has impeded its ability to effectively carry out its national strategy for financial literacy, and its statutory mandates of both improving financial education, and
streamlining and improving federal financial education activities. As a result, the
FLEC lacks an effective organizational structure to facilitate goal-setting and decision-making and accountability for outcomes. A more clear and focused leadership
structure is needed to guide the work of the FLEC.
In addition to structural impediments to coordination, performance and outcome
data have not been used systematically to assess the effectiveness of federal activities
29. GAO, April 2014.
16 Federal Financial Literacy Reform: Coordinating and Improving Financial Literacy Efforts
and provide a basis to streamline, augment or improve them. Outcomes should reflect
the ability of Americans to attain improved financial decision-making as opposed
to being activity driven. The GAO has noted that “financial literacy program evaluations are most reliable and effective when they measure the programs’ impact on
consumers’ behavior.”30 By adopting measures that member agencies directly impact
(performance measures), and indirectly affect (outcome measures), the FLEC will be
able to better assess the effectiveness of financial education activities and thus make
improvements in the future.
Recommendations
Treasury recommends the FLEC establish bylaws to set clear expectations for its decision-making and roles, including establishing a six-member Executive Committee
comprised of Treasury (chair), CFPB (vice chair), and ED, HUD, DOL and DoD.
The Executive Committee will be responsible for crafting, with input from other
FLEC members, a shared agenda for action and priorities, and be accountable to
report on achievement of that agenda. The agenda would be voted on and approved
by a majority of the members.