The main challenges are, if such divergence simply reflects differences in financial market structures
and regulatory/supervisory tools and instruments as well as with a principles-based approach, or a
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies
PE 740.067 46
more fundamental shift towards a less regulated financial system that focuses on growth and
‘competitiveness’ of the sector and less on its stability. It is important to stress, however, that not all
observers, and none of our interviewees, see necessarily a contradiction between
growth/competitiveness and stability, even though economic research has shown that rapid growth
of the financial sector can result in financial fragility and crisis.
3.2.1. Low, medium and high divergence
Low divergence: Under this scenario, there will be adjustments to regulations such as Solvency II as
well as other initiatives in line with increasing the ‘competitiveness’ of the UK as financial centre.
However, there will not be major divergence, especially in areas with international standards, such as
bank capital regulation. There might be informal consultations between UK and EU regulatory and
possibly legislative authorities to converge on rules in new areas such as crypto and the decentralised
financial system more generally. Even under the politically most positive developments (as described
below in 3.2.2), however, there will be divergence between the UK and EU, also as EU Law is significantly
amended with the UK not following it (in other words, passive divergence).
Regulatory cooperation, however, will allow for such divergence not to turn into beggar-thy-neighbour
policies. Apart from resolving the political conflict around the Northern Ireland Protocol (NIP), a
reconfirmation of the stability focus of the prudential policies and regulation in the UK is necessary in
our opinion. In terms of specific segments of the financial system, we would expect least divergence in
areas where international standards play an important role, such as capital and liquidity regulation of
banks. Interestingly, it seems that the EU is diverging more from the initial global standards than the
UK (see discussion above in 3.1). Similarly, given the early initiative that EU authorities have taken with
the green taxonomy and the joint participation in many global fora and other cooperation initiatives,
we would also expect the UK to follow the lead in this area, as already discussed above, even though
there might be a certain degree of divergence. It is important to stress that many of the legislative
initiatives in sustainable finance in the UK are still in the early stages and one has to look beyond
political headlines to details once they are spelled out.
Medium divergence: Under this scenario, there will be more significant divergence and fewer
attempts to converge on new rules such as in the area of green finance or crypto asset developments.
Divergence will be more likely and more prominent in areas where international standards are less
important and where the UK has not inherited any EU regulations such as in the two areas already
mentioned, green finance and crypto. While supervisory cooperation between EU and UK authorities
might continue (and will be necessary in areas of regulatory equivalence), regulatory cooperation even
if formalised will be less strong and there will not necessarily be any voluntary attempt by UK
authorities to follow adjustments and changes in EU regulation and supervision. On the other hand,
both the UK and the EU are members of global regulatory bodies across different segments of the
financial system (FSB, Basel Committee) and this will effectively be a constraint on too much positive
or negative divergence.
High divergence: Under this final scenario, there would be a rather aggressive legislative and
regulatory drive in the UK to diverge from EU rules. This would involve both replacing existing EU rules
with new regulation and adopting divergent rules where such rules were not inherited, such as in green
finance and crypto/digital finance more broadly. It can also include not following changes in EU
legislation to thus mark differences between the two regulatory jurisdictions. We would expect such
aggressive divergence especially in areas where UK authorities see growth opportunities and they feel
less constrained by international fora and cooperation initiatives. Crypto is certainly an area where one
could envision such aggressive divergence. Such high divergence, however, seems more likely under
Recent trends in UK financial sector regulation and possible implications for the EU
47 PE 740.067
an institutional architecture in the UK where the independence of regulatory authorities has been
significantly weakened (though not necessarily in a formal, i.e., legislative manner) and
growth/competitiveness objectives are clearly prioritised over stability concerns.
As we will discuss in section 3.2.2, which of the three scenarios will develop depends very much on how
the overall political relationship between the EU and the UK will develop over the next years, with the
Northern Ireland Protocol being the major hurdle in this relationship.
3.2.2. Disentangling the Northern Ireland Protocol situation to unblock/reactivate UKEU regulatory cooperation
Resolving the dispute between the UK and the EU on the implementation of the Northern Ireland
Protocol (NIP) seems key to rebuild trust and unblock UK-EU regulatory cooperation across a number
of policy areas including the financial sector. Resolving this dispute requires political leadership from
the UK Prime Minister taking office in October 2022, Rishi Sunak, and bringing on board both the
European Research Group (ERG) of hardcore Brexiters in the British Parliament and Northern Ireland’s
Unionists, not an easy feat. While immediate conflicts can be avoided by delaying the legislative
process of the NIP Bill (which would override and breach the NIP and the Withdrawal Agreement),
cooperation between UK and EU authorities on trade data provision from the UK to the EU, and not
taking unilateral steps, the resolution of the ‘stand-off’ cannot be delayed forever. Namely, the
Northern Ireland Executive has not been established since the 2022 May elections and new elections
to the Legislative Assembly will have to be called in spring 2023, which raise the political temperature
in the region. The upcoming 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement in 2023 increases both
internal and external (especially from the US) pressures. Finally, in case of increasing divergence in
goods standards between the UK and the EU, there will be increasing pressure from the EU on properly
monitoring trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
In case the conflict around the Northern Ireland Protocol can be resolved to the satisfaction of both
sides, there should be few if any barriers for future cooperation between UK and EU authorities on
financial sector issues. Addressing the stand-off around the NIP is thus a necessary though not sufficient
condition. At the end of November 2022, the Council Presidency and the European Parliament actually
reached a provisional agreement on a Regulation on ‘autonomous measures’ potentially taken as a
retaliation and that would allow the EU to ensure ‘timely and effective exercise of its rights in enforcing
and implementing’ the Withdrawal Agreement and the TCA162. At the same time, not long after, the
European Commission Vice President Maroš Šefčovič stressed the ‘window of opportunity for a positive
outcome’163 in the context of the extension of practical arrangements for veterinary medicines until
December 2025. This positive ‘mood music’ has been echoed by Leo Varadkar, the Taoiseach in Ireland,
who stressed the increased trust and flexibility between the UK and the EU – notwithstanding
remaining differences164. There will certainly be competing interests (similar to what we could observe
during the UK’s EU membership) and no expectations of complete convergence, but an institutional
framework for regulatory dialogue could be put in place.

162 Council of the EU, ‘EU-UK Relations: Council Presidency and European Parliament Reach Provisional Agreement on a Regulation on
Autonomous Measures’ (30 November 2022) https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2022/11/30/eu-uk-relationscouncil-presidency-and-european-parliament-reach-provisional-agreement-on-a-regulation-on-autonomous-measures/, accessed 5
January 2023.
163 ‘Statement by Vice-President Maroš Šefčovič’ (European Commission, 19 December 2022)
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/statement_22_7831, accessed 5 January 2023.
164 “Much Better Mood Music” in EU-UK Relations than at Any Period since Brexit Referendum - Taoiseach’ (n 22).
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies
PE 740.067 48
Before the resolution of this conflict, it is difficult to see any progress happening in terms of regulatory
cooperation. Similar, if the conflict around the NIP escalates again, it is hard to envision any progress
towards trade partnership of the UK with third countries such as the US.