Take advantage of issuers’ shopping portals
 Before you shop, whether in-person or online, look for card-linked offers from your credit card issuer. If you have the Chase Freedom Flex or Chase Freedom Unlimited, for example, check the Shop through Chase portal to earn more cash back on all your purchases. Although the stores in the Chase shopping portal vary, they frequently include options like Walmart, Sephora, Best Buy and Macy’s. Other issues have their own portals — with Barclaycard you can shop on RewardsBoost, and with a Capital One card you get access to Capital One Shopping.
 

 Some issuers offer additional rewards opportunities as well. American Express, Chase, and Capital One have programs — Amex Offers, Chase Offers and Capital One Offers, respectively — through which you can opt in to earn additional cash back from select retailers.
 

 For example, with the Capital One QuicksilverOne Cash Rewards Credit Card, you can earn more cash back with particular retailers. To do so, log in to your Capital One account and navigate to the offers portal. In the portal, click “Get this deal” to be taken to a retailer’s site to shop and earn additional rewards at check out.
 

 Generally speaking, these offers are found in your online account, have limited redemption windows and must be accepted individually. Cash back percentages vary from store to store, and there are usually limits that cap how much additional cash back you can earn.
 

 Make the most of cash back apps
 If you want to earn more cash back for online purchases, you often can increase your earnings through the use of cash back apps.
 

 Cash back apps and sites like Dosh, Ibotta and Rakuten (formerly Ebates) give you a percentage of your spending back on qualifying purchases — on top of the cash back you’re earning on your credit card. For example, Rakuten lets you earn additional cash back when you click through the website before you shop with stores like Kohl’s, Macy’s, Nordstrom, Old Navy and Priceline.com.
 

 Use your cash back wisely
 While maximizing cash back earned on spending always makes sense, that’s only part of the equation. You also need to redeem your cash back in ways that make sense for your goals, whether you want to reduce the amount you owe on your credit card bill, you want to splurge for a fun purchase or you hope to utilize rewards to improve your finances in some way.
 

 Consider the following tips to get the most out of your cash back rewards each year:
 

 Redeem your cash back as statement credits
 One of the easiest ways to redeem cash back is for statement credits to your account. This redemption effectively lowers the amount you owe on your credit card bill, thus helping you save money over time. If you sign up for the Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card to earn 2% cash back on all purchases and redeem your rewards for cash back, for example, you would ultimately save 2% on everything you buy with your card.
 

 Just remember that rewards only get you “ahead” if you pay your credit card bill in full each month and avoid interest. If you’re paying 20% in credit card interest or more to earn 2% cash back, you’re not doing yourself any favors.
 

 Save your cash back for a big purchase
 You can also save up your rewards for a purchase you want to make down the line, whether it’s a splurge purchase you don’t want to cover in cash or you need to buy something for your everyday life. In either case, most cash back credit cards let you grow your rewards balance over time until you’re ready to use it.
 

 Keep in mind: Using rewards for merchandise won't always get you the best value, and that you'll want to be strategic if you go this route. As an example, cash back credit cards from Chase offer 1 cent per point for statement credit redemptions but only 0.8 cents per point for purchases through Amazon.com or PayPal. If you wanted to use rewards for an Amazon or PayPal purchase, it would make more sense to pay for the purchase with your card outright then redeem rewards for statement credits after the fact.
 

 Use your cash back to pay down debt
 You can also use rewards to pay off some types of debt, either directly depending on the card you have or indirectly by redeeming for cash back. In terms of options that let you redeem rewards for debt payments, some Wells Fargo credit cards (including the Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card) let you redeem cash back toward a Wells Fargo mortgage in addition to options like gift cards and statement credits.
 

 Many cash back credit cards also let you redeem rewards for a check in the mail, which you could deposit into a bank account and use for debt payments.