Vitamin K is best known for promoting proper blood clotting and bone health.1
 

  A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials revealed that vitamin K supplementation also has favorable effects on glucose metabolism parameters and risk of developing type II diabetes.2
 

 In observational studies, higher intake of vitamin K has been associated with a reduced risk of type II diabetes and improved markers of glucose control.3-5
 

 Clinical trials have shown that vitamin K supplementation can improve metabolic health in adults with diabetes and prediabetes, significantly reducing elevated glucose and insulin levels.6-8
 

 That may help prevent the damage caused by high blood sugar in diabetics and reduce the risk of developing type II diabetes in the first place.
 

 The Importance of Vitamin K
 Vitamin K is found in green leafy vegetables, fermented foods, and some animal products, particularly organ meats. It occurs in two general forms, vitamin K1 and vitamin K2.1
 

 Vitamin K is required for the proper function and activation of different proteins known as vitamin K-dependent proteins.
 

 These proteins include several clotting factors that control blood coagulation as well as osteocalcin, a protein tied to vascular and bone health.
 

 Some of these vitamin K-dependent proteins help keep calcium in the bones, and out of blood vessels. Calcified blood vessels are one of the hallmarks of atherosclerosis and vascular dysfunction. Without adequate vitamin K, the risk of cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, and osteopenia rises.1,9
 

 Other vitamin K-dependent proteins have favorable t effects on metabolic function.3,10
 

 Link to Metabolic Health
 Multiple types of research indicate that Vitamin K2 intake may lower risk of developing type II diabetes.11
 

 The vitamin's role in glucose homeostasis may be due in part to the activation of osteocalcin. In addition to its role in bone mineralization, osteocalcin stimulates healthy insulin and adiponectin expression.12
 

 Studies show that people with higher intake of vitamin K tend to have better insulin sensitivity, better control of blood glucose levels, and a decreased risk of developing type II diabetes.3,5
 

 In an observational study embedded in a randomized controlled trial of the Mediterranean diet for prevention of cardiovascular disease, men and women without cardiovascular disease were followed for 5.5 years. Dietary information was collected annually through questionnaires.
 

 It was found that baseline intake of vitamin K1 was lower in participants who developed diabetes during the study. It was also found that the risk of developing diabetes dropped by approximately 17% for every 100 mcg of vitamin K1 consumed per day.
 

 Subjects who increased their dietary vitamin K1 intake over those 5.5 years had a 51% reduction in risk for developing diabetes, compared with those who did not increase vitamin K intake. The authors concluded that dietary vitamin K1 is associated with reduced risk of type II diabetes.13
 How It Works
 Vitamin K appears to improve insulin function and glucose metabolism in at least two main ways:
 

 Activating vitamin K-dependent proteins is involved in regulating glucose metabolism.3
 Suppressing chronic inflammation and production of pro-inflammatory compounds, which is a major contributor to diminished insulin sensitivity and metabolic disease.3
 Together, these actions could help reduce elevated glycemic markers and lower risk for diabetic complications.