Please note that Oura Services are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease or medical condition. The information and guidance in Oura Services are there for informational purposes only and cannot replace the services of health professionals or physicians. You should always consult a physician if you have any questions regarding a medical condition or any changes you intend to make to your sleep or activity based on information or guidance from Oura Services. Never disregard or delay in seeking professional medical advice because of something you’ve read from Oura Services.
We are not responsible for any health problems that may result from information or guidance you receive from Oura Services. If you make any change to your sleep or activity based on Oura Services, you agree that you do so fully at your own risk. It is important to be sensitive to your body’s responses. For example, if you feel unexpected, repeated or long term pain, fatigue or discomfort due to having made changes to your sleep or activity, it is recommended that you consult a physician before continuing with such changes. The information and guidance in Oura Services may be misleading if your physiological functions and responses differ significantly from population averages due to medical conditions or rare natural differences.
Please be cautious that the ring or any other Oura product you wear does not get caught on fixed structures or heavy objects when moving yourself or said heavier objects.
If you experience redness or skin irritation on your finger due to the ring or any other Oura product, remove it immediately. If symptoms persist longer than 2-3 days of not using your Oura product, please contact a dermatologist.
Finger size can vary depending on the time of the day, and sometimes it may be difficult to remove the ring from your finger. In case the ring gets stuck:
→ Use cold water and gentle soap to wet your finger, and slowly twist the ring to remove it.
→ Hold your hand up above your heart until the blood pressure gets lower, and then try to remove it.
→ In cases of emergency and/or discomfort, when you can’t remove the ring yourself, seek immediate medical attention.
Use a soft cloth or hand wash with mild soap and water to clean the ring.
Your Oura Ring can be worn during showers, baths, swimming, and snorkeling.
Try to avoid wearing the ring when strength training, working with a shovel or other heavy tools, or carrying heavy objects made of metal, ceramics or stone. In addition, try to avoid wearing the ring next to other rings or objects which are made of metal, ceramics, stones or diamonds. The Oura Ring may get scratched and can itself scratch softer metal jewelry or other objects in close contact with the ring like phone covers made of gold, silver, or aluminum. Some ceramic phone covers with a soft coating may also get scratched.
Keep the ring away from children. This product is not intended for individuals under the age of 18. Seek immediate medical attention if you know or suspect that a child has swallowed the ring. Do not leave the ring exposed to heat, such as in a vehicle or in the sun. Do not puncture the ring or its battery.
Please avoid handling batteries, or working on devices and with machinery that contain batteries while wearing your Oura Ring. In certain cases, where both the cathode and the anode of another battery touch the ring, there is a risk of a short circuit which is similar to standard metallic rings. This can result in a potentially dangerous shock. Please take the proper precautions to avoid these situations.