Law enforcement agencies’ use of facial recognition technology (FRT), while not a new practice, has received increased attention from policymakers and the public. In the course of carrying out their duties, federal law enforcement agencies may use FRT for a variety of purposes. For instance, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) uses the technology to aid its investigations, and the bureau provides facial recognition assistance to federal, state, local, and tribal law enforcement partners. State, local, and tribal law enforcement have also adopted facial recognition software systems to assist in various phases of investigations. In addition, border officials use facial recognition for identity verification purposes. The use of FRT by law enforcement agencies has spurred questions on a range of topics. Some primary concerns revolve around the accuracy of the technology, including potential race-, gender-, and age-related biases; the collection, retention, and security of images contained in various facial recognition databases; public notification regarding the use of facial recognition and other image capturing technology; and policies or standards governing law enforcement agencies’ use of the technology. Some of these concerns have manifested in actions such as federal, state, and city efforts to prohibit or bound law enforcement agencies’ use of FRT. In addition, some companies producing facial recognition software, such as Microsoft, IBM, and Amazon, have enacted new barriers to law enforcement using their technologies. This report provides an overview of federal law enforcement agencies’ use of FRT, including the current status of scientific standards for its use. The report includes a discussion of how FRT may be used by law enforcement agencies with traditional policing missions as well as by those charged with securing the U.S. borders. It also discusses considerations for policymakers debating whether or how to influence federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies’ use of FRT. 
The term facial recognition technology can have different meanings for law enforcement agencies, policymakers, and the public, and the process of using facial recognition in a law enforcement context can involve various technologies and actors. Broadly, as technology experts have noted, “[t]here is no one standard system design for facial recognition systems. Not only do organizations build their systems differently, and for different environments, but they also use different terms to describe how their systems work.” 3 The following key terms are provided to help in understanding facial recognition technologies and processes in this report. 4 Face detection technology determines whether a digital image contains a face. Facial classification algorithms analyze a face image to produce an estimate of age, sex, or some other property, but do not identify the individual. An example application of this would be retail stores using facial classification to gather data on the gender and age ranges of people visiting a store, without identifying each shopper individually. Facial comparison and facial identification are often used in the same context. They involve a human manually examining the differences and similarities between facial images, or between a live subject and facial images, for the purpose of determining if they represent the same person. Facial comparison has three broad categories: assessment, review, and examination. Facial assessment is a quick image-to-image or image-to-person comparison, typically carried out in screening or access control situations, and is the least rigorous form of facial comparison. Facial review (often used in investigative, operational, or intelligence gathering applications) and facial examination (often used in a forensic applications) are increasingly rigorous levels of image comparison and should involve verification by an additional reviewer or examiner. They may involve a formal, systematic examination of facial images.
Facial recognition broadly involves the automated searching of a facial image (a probe) against a known collection or database of photos. Facial recognition algorithms compare identity information from facial features in two face image samples and produce a measure of similarity (sometimes called a match score) between them; this information can be used to determine whether the same person is in both images. Images that have a similarity score above a defined threshold are presented to the user. There are two ways in which facial recognition algorithms work to compare images: • One-to-one verification algorithms compare a photo of someone claiming a specific identity with a stored image(s) of that known identity to determine if it is the same person. Uses of these algorithms can include unlocking a smartphone and verifying identities at a security checkpoint. • One-to-many identification search algorithms compare features of a probe photo with all those in a gallery of images. The algorithms can provide either a fixed number of the most similar candidates, or all candidates with a similarity score above a preset threshold, for human review. These algorithms may be used for purposes such as identifying potential suspect leads from a mugshot database. Probe refers to the facial image or template searched against a gallery or database of photos in a facial recognition system. Real-time facial recognition involves facial recognition algorithms that can be used while a video recording is taking place in order to determine in real time whether an individual in a video matches with a list of candidates in a database of photos. Threshold refers to any real number against which similarity scores are compared to produce a verification decision or gallery of images.
Law enforcement agencies’ use of FRT has received attention from policymakers and the public over the past several years. There have been heightened concerns following several revelations, including that Clearview AI, a company that developed image-search technology used by law enforcement agencies around the country, had amassed a database of over 3 billion images against which probe photos could be compared. FRT is one of several biometric technologies employed by law enforcement agencies, which also include fingerprint, palm print, DNA and iris scans. FRT can be used by law enforcement for a variety of purposes such as generating investigative leads, identifying victims of crimes, facilitating the examination of forensic evidence, and helping verify the identity of individuals being released from prison. Press releases and statements from the Department of Justice highlight how the technology has been used in the criminal justice system. FRT has been used to help generate suspect leads. In one case, FBI agents used the technology, via the Mississippi Fusion Center, to identify a potential suspect in an interstate stalking case who had allegedly been harassing high school girls through their Twitter accounts.The suspect was later sentenced to 46 months imprisonment and three years of supervised release for this stalking.FRT may also be used to help identify victims. For example, officials have noted FRT was used to help identify “an accident victim lying unconscious on the side of the road.”FRT, along with other pieces of evidence, has been used to support probable cause in affidavits in support of criminal complaints. In one case, an FBI agent cited the use of FRT in a criminal complaint against a bank robbery suspect. The agent noted that images from the bank’s surveillance footage were run against facial recognition software, and a photo of the suspect was returned as a possible match. Investigators then interviewed associates of the suspect, who identified him as the man in the bank surveillance footage.
Notably, the frequency and extent to which FRT is used at various phases of the criminal justice system (from generating leads and helping establish probable cause for an arrest or indictment, to serving as evidence in courtrooms) is unknown. It is most often discussed as being employed during investigations by law enforcement officials. Of note, FRT is generally used by law enforcement in one-to-many searches to produce a gallery of potential suspects ranked by similarity and not to provide a single affirmative match. As such, the technology currently might not be relied upon in the same way that other biometric evidence might. Rather, it is the results of an investigator’s facial review between a probe face and the gallery of images produced from running a probe face through facial recognition software that might be used as evidence contributing to an arrest and prosecution. 
