section should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Overview Timberland Bancorp, Inc., a Washington corporation, is the holding company for Timberland Bank. The Bank opened for business in 1915 and serves consumers and businesses across Grays Harbor, Thurston, Pierce, King, Kitsap and Lewis counties, Washington with a full range of lending and deposit services through its 23 branches (including its main office in Hoquiam). At September 30, 2022, the Company had total assets of $1.86 billion, net loans receivable of $1.13 billion, total deposits of $1.63 billion and total shareholders’ equity of $218.57 million. The Company’s business activities generally are limited to passive investment activities and oversight of its investment in the Bank. Accordingly, the information set forth in this report relates primarily to the Bank’s operations. The Bank is a community-oriented bank which has traditionally offered a variety of savings products to its retail and business customers while concentrating its lending activities on real estate secured loans. Lending activities have been focused primarily on the origination of loans secured by real estate, including residential construction loans, one- to four-family residential loans, multi-family loans and commercial real estate loans. The Bank originates adjustable-rate residential mortgage loans, some of which do not qualify for sale in the secondary market. The Bank also originates commercial business loans and other consumer loans. The profitability of the Company’s operations depends primarily on its net interest income after provision for (recapture of) loan losses. Net interest income is the difference between interest income, which is the income that the Company earns on interest-earning assets, which are primarily loans and investments, and interest expense, which is the amount that the Company pays on its interest-bearing liabilities, which are primarily deposits and borrowings (as needed). Net interest income is affected by changes in the volume and mix of interest-earning assets, the interest earned on those assets, the volume and mix of interest-bearing liabilities and the interest paid on those interest-bearing liabilities. Management attempts to maintain a net interest margin placing it within the top quartile of its Washington State peers. Changes in market interest rates, the slope of the yield curve, and interest we earn on interest earning assets or pay on interest bearing liabilities, as well as the volume and types of interest earning assets, interest bearing and non-interest bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity, usually have the largest impact on changes in our net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income during a reporting period. Since March 2022, in response to inflation, the FOMC of the Federal Reserve has increased the target range for the federal funds rate by 300 basis points, including 150 basis points during the third calendar calendar quarter of 2022, to a range of 3.00% to 3.25% as of September 30, 2022. In November 2022, the FOMC increased the target range for the federal funds rate another 75 basis points to a range of 3.75% to 4.00%. We believe our balance sheet is structured to enhance our average yield on interest-earning assets as the lagging benefit of variable rate interest-earnings assets beginning to reprice occurs as well as a higher net interest margin if the FOMC continues to raise the targeted federal funds rate in an effort to curb inflation, which appears likely based on recent Federal Reserve communications and interest rate forecasts. The provision for (recapture of) loan losses is dependent on changes in the loan portfolio and management’s assessment of the collectability of the loan portfolio as well as prevailing economic and market conditions. The allowance for loan losses reflects the amount that the Company believes is adequate to cover probable credit losses inherent in its loan portfolio. The Company recorded a provision for loan losses of $270,000 for the year ended September 30, 2022, primarily due to increased loan portfolio growth. The Company did not record a provision for loan losses for the year ended September 30, 2021, primarily reflecting the improving economy and the resulting decline in forecasted probable loan losses from COVID-19 during that fiscal year. Net income is also affected by non-interest income and non-interest expense. For the year ended September 30, 2022, non-interest income consisted primarily of service charges on deposit accounts, gain on sales of loans, ATM and debit card interchange transaction fees, an increase in the cash surrender value of BOLI, escrow fees and other operating income. Noninterest income is also increased by net recoveries on investment securities and reduced by net OTTI losses on investment securities, if any. Non-interest income is also decreased by valuation allowances on loan servicing rights and increased by recoveries of valuation allowances on loan servicing rights, if any. Non-interest expense consisted primarily of salaries and employee benefits, premises and equipment, advertising, ATM and debit card interchange transaction fees, postage and courier expenses, amortization of CDI, state and local taxes, professional fees, FDIC insurance premiums, loan administration and foreclosure expenses, data processing and telecommunications expenses, deposit operation expenses and other non-interest expenses. Non-interest expense in certain periods are reduced by gains on the sale of premises and equipment and by gains on the sale of OREO. Non-interest income and non-interest expense are affected by the growth of the Company's operations and growth in the number and balances of loan and deposit accounts. 51 Results of operations may be affected significantly by general and local economic and competitive conditions, changes in market interest rates, governmental policies and actions of regulatory authorities. Operating Strategy The Company is a bank holding company which operates primarily through its subsidiary, the Bank. The Company's primary objective is to operate the Bank as a well capitalized, profitable, independent, community-oriented financial institution, serving customers in its primary market area of Grays Harbor, Pierce, Thurston, Kitsap, King and Lewis counties. The Company's strategy is to provide products and superior service to small businesses and individuals located in its primary market area. The Company's goal is to deliver returns to shareholders by focusing on the origination of higher-yielding assets (in particular, commercial real estate, construction, and commercial business loans), increasing core deposit balances, managing problem assets, efficiently managing expenses, and seeking expansion opportunities. The Company seeks to achieve these results by focusing on the following objectives: Expand our presence within our existing market areas by capturing opportunities resulting from changes in the competitive environment. We currently conduct our business primarily in western Washington. We have a community bank strategy that emphasizes responsive and personalized service to our customers. As a result of the consolidation of banks in our market areas, we believe that there is an opportunity for a community and customer focused bank to expand its customer base. By offering timely decision making, delivering appropriate banking products and services, and providing customer access to our senior managers, we believe that community banks, such as Timberland Bank, can distinguish themselves from larger banks operating in our market areas. We believe that we have a significant opportunity to attract additional borrowers and depositors and expand our market presence and market share within our extensive branch footprint. Portfolio diversification. In recent years, we have limited the origination of speculative construction loans and land development loans in favor of loans that possess credit profiles representing less risk to the Bank. We continue originating owner/builder and custom construction loans, multi-family loans, commercial business loans and commercial real estate loans which offer higher risk adjusted returns, shorter maturities and more sensitivity to interest rate fluctuations than fixed-rate oneto four-family loans. We anticipate capturing more of each customer's banking relationship by cross selling our loan and deposit products and offering additional services to our customers. Increase core deposits and other retail deposit products. We focus on establishing a total banking relationship with our customers with the intent of internally funding our loan portfolio. We anticipate that the continued focus on customer relationships will increase our level of core deposits. In addition to our retail branches, we maintain technology based products such as business cash management and a business remote deposit product that enable us to compete effectively with banks of all sizes. Managing exposure to fluctuating interest rates. For many years, the majority of the loans the Bank has retained in its portfolio have generally possessed periodic interest rate adjustment features or have been relatively short-term in nature. Loans originated for portfolio retention have generally included ARM loans, short-term construction loans, and, to a lesser extent, commercial business loans with interest rates tied to a market index such as the Prime Rate. Longer term fixed-rate mortgage loans have generally been originated for sale into the secondary market, although from time to time, the Bank may retain a portion of its fixed-rate mortgage loan originations and extend the initial fixed-rate period of its hybrid ARM commercial real estate loans for asset/liability purposes. Continue generating revenues through mortgage banking operations. The majority of the fixed-rate residential mortgage loans we originate have historically been sold into the secondary market with servicing retained. This strategy produces gains on the sale of such loans and reduces the interest rate and credit risk associated with fixed-rate residential lending. We continue to originate custom construction and owner/builder construction loans for sale into the secondary market upon the completion of construction. Maintaining strong asset quality. We believe that strong asset quality is a key to our long-term financial success. The percentage of non-performing loans to loans receivable, net was 0.18% and 0.29% at September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The Company's percentage of non-performing assets to total assets at September 30, 2022 was 0.12% compared to 0.18% at September 30, 2021. Non-performing assets have decreased to $2.17 million at September 30, 2022 from $3.17 million at September 30, 2021. We continue to seek to reduce the level of non-performing assets through collections, writedowns, modifications and sales of OREO. We also take proactive steps to resolve our non-performing loans, including negotiating payment plans, forbearances, loan modifications and loan extensions and accepting short payoffs on delinquent loans when such actions have been deemed appropriate. Although the Company plans to continue to place emphasis on certain 52