Several provisions of AWIA Title II, “Drinking Water System Improvement,” amend SDWA to
revise existing drinking water programs, reauthorize appropriations, and establish new drinking
water infrastructure grant programs.
SDWA authorizes the regulation of contaminants in public water systems. Enacted in 1974, the
act was last broadly amended in 1996.17 The act is implemented through programs that (1)
establish national primary drinking water regulations and monitoring and reporting requirements
for contaminants present in water delivered by public water systems, (2) promote water system
compliance through technical and financial assistance and capacity development programs, and
(3) address public water systems’ preparedness for emergencies.18 The act established a federalstate partnership in which states, tribes, and territories may be delegated primary implementation
and enforcement authority (i.e., primacy) for the drinking water program.19

17 SDWA Amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104-182).
18 In addition, SDWA Part C includes programs to protect underground sources of drinking water. CRS Report
RL31243, Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA): A Summary of the Act and Its Major Requirements, by Mary Tiemann,
provides an overview of SDWA and includes statistics and tables on the numbers and types of regulated public water
systems.
19 Currently, 49 states, the territories, and the Navajo Nation have applied for and received primacy for the drinking
water program. EPA retains implementation and enforcement authority for Wyoming, the District of Columbia, and 
America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 (P.L. 115-270): Drinking Water Provisions
Congressional Research Service 6
One key component of SDWA is the requirement that EPA establish national primary drinking
water regulations for contaminants that may adversely affect human health and are likely to be
present in public water supplies.20 EPA has issued regulations for more than 90 contaminants.
These include numerical standards or treatment techniques for drinking water disinfectants and
their byproducts, microorganisms, radionuclides, organic chemicals, and inorganic chemicals.21
The SDWA Amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104-182) reauthorized appropriations for most SDWA
programs through FY2003. Although the authority has expired for most appropriations, Congress
has continued to appropriate funds for the ongoing SDWA programs.22 Even though the
authorization of appropriations may expire, program authority (i.e., an agency’s “enabling”
authority) does not expire unless there is a “sunset” date for that authority or if Congress repeals
it through subsequent laws.
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund Program
Authorized in 1996, the DWSRF program provides federal financial assistance to communities to
finance drinking water infrastructure improvements.23 SDWA Section 1452 authorizes EPA to
make annual grants to states to capitalize their state revolving loan fund.24 The statute requires
states to provide a 20% match. States may use DWSRF financing for public water system projects
needed to comply with federal drinking water standards and address risks to human health. The
primary type of DWSRF financial assistance are low interest rate loans. SDWA Section 1452
authorizes states to provide additional subsidization (including forgiveness of principal) to
disadvantaged communities.25 The federal capitalization grants together with state funds (e.g.,
state match, loan repayments, leveraged bonds, and other state sources) are intended to build a
sustainable source of drinking water infrastructure funding for the state. The authorization of
appropriation for DWSRF expired in FY2003. Congress has continued to provide funds for the
DWSRF program through annual appropriations.
From FY1997 through FY2018, Congress appropriated over $23.33 billion for the DWSRF
program. The appropriation for DWSRF program generally ranged between $820.0 million in
FY2000 and $1.39 billion in FY2010.26
DWSRF Program Revisions (AWIA Sections 2002, 2015, and 2022)
AWIA makes the most substantial revisions to the DWSRF provisions of SDWA since the
program was authorized in 1996. These revisions expand the eligible uses of DWSRF financial
assistance, provide states with additional flexibility to administer the DWSRF program, and
include provisions intended to make DWSRF assistance more accessible to public water
systems.
27
AWIA Section 2015(a) amends SDWA to expressly state that DWSRF funds can be used for
projects to replace or rehabilitate aging treatment, storage, or distribution systems.28 Under EPA
guidance, these replacement and rehabilitation projects have been eligible for financial assistance
from the DWSRF if needed to protect public health. According to EPA’s needs survey, this
category of projects accounts for 66.1% of the estimated drinking water infrastructure need.29
Prior to AWIA, these activities were not previously explicitly identified in statute.30
Section 2015 also revises existing DWSRF provisions that address financial assistance for
disadvantaged communities. These amendments increase the portion of a state’s capitalization
grant that states may dedicate to additional subsidization and extend the amortization period for
loans made to disadvantaged communities. Before AWIA, states could use 30% of their annual
capitalization grants to subsidize loans for disadvantaged communities.31 Section 2015(c) of
AWIA increases that proportion to 35% while conditionally requiring states to use at least 6% of
their capitalization grant for these subsidies.32 The section also amends the SDWA DWSRF
provisions to extend the amortization period for loans made to disadvantaged communities from
30 to 40 years.
Section 2015(d) of AWIA also extends the repayment and amortization period for all projects
financed by the DWSRF. Previously, SDWA required DWSRF financing recipients to pay the
initial principal and interest payments within one year of project completion. This amendment
extends the date of that initial payment to 18 months after project completion. This section also
authorizes the extension of the amortization period for projects that receive DWSRF assistance
from 20 to 30 years.
Section 2015(e) requires EPA to evaluate and include the cost to replace lead service lines in the
drinking water infrastructure needs survey, which EPA completes every four years.33 EPA uses the
needs survey to allot the DWSRF appropriation among the states.
34 In conducting the needs
survey, EPA has not previously requested that public water systems report the cost to replace
these lines.35 AWIA specifies that the cost to replace lead lines must be included in the needs
survey (to the extent practicable), which may potentially affect some states’ allotments of
DWSRF capitalization grants.
Section 2015(g) of AWIA requires EPA to gather specified information on DWSRF
administration from state drinking water administrators and report to Congress on best practices
for implementing the DWSRF to facilitate the application process and to improve DWSRF
financial management and sustainability.
Source Water Assessment and Protection
In 1996, Congress added source water assessment provisions to SDWA to encourage protection of
drinking water sources.
36 Section 1453 required states to develop source water assessment
programs that delineate areas from which public water systems receive water and identify the
origins of regulated contaminants to determine threats to water systems. States were authorized to
fund these activities from 10% of their DWSRF capitalization grant for FY1996 and FY1997.37
Section 2015(f) of AWIA removes this fiscal year limitation and accordingly authorizes states to
use a portion of their capitalization grant to fund these source water assessments or update an
existing source water assessment.38
The 1996 SDWA amendments required states to conduct source water assessments as a condition
of adopting modified monitoring requirements.
39 However, the 1996 amendments did not
authorize states to fund implementation of source water protection plans from their DWSRF
capitalization grants. AWIA Section 2002 authorizes states to fund implementation of surface
drinking water sources protection efforts and activities from the 10% set-aside of a state’s annual
DWSRF capitalization grant.
Source water protection is also addressed in the “Protecting Source Water” section of this report.