Executive Summary 
‘Artificial Intelligence’ (‘AI’), comprising machine-learning and other analytical algorithm-based  automated systems, has become an important aspect of our lives. In recent years, this technology has  been increasingly deployed in criminal justice systems across the world, playing an increasingly  significant role in the administration of justice in criminal cases. This trend is often driven by  perceptions about the reliability and impartiality of technological solutions, and pressures to make  cost savings in policing and court services. 
However, studies in various jurisdictions, including in Europe, provide substantial evidence that AI and  machine-learning systems can have a significantly negative influence on criminal justice.  
AI systems have been shown to directly generate and reinforce discriminatory and unjust outcomes;  infringing fundamental rights, they have been found to have little to no positive influence on the  quality of human decisions, and they have been criticised for poor design that does not comply with  human rights standards.  
Most AI systems used in criminal justice systems are statistical models, based on data which is representative of structural biases and inequalities in the societies which the data represents, and  which is always comprehensively lacking in the kind of detail that is needed to make truly ‘accurate’  predictions or decisions. The data used to build and populate these systems is mostly or entirely from  within criminal justice systems, such as law enforcement or crime records. This data does not  represent an accurate record of criminality, but merely a record of law enforcement - the crimes,  locations and groups that are policed within that society, rather than the actual occurrence of crime.  The data reflects social inequalities and discriminatory policing patterns, and its use in these AI  systems merely results in a reinforcement and re-entrenchment of those inequalities and  discrimination in criminal justice outcomes.  
Given these extremely serious risks, strong regulatory frameworks are needed to govern the use of AI  in criminal justice decision-making and, in some circumstances, to restrict its use entirely.  
Existing EU data protection laws restrict the use of automated decisions, but there are gaps and  ambiguities that could result in the use of AI systems in ways that undermine human rights, if not  accompanied by further guidance or legislation.  
Firstly, EU laws currently only prohibit decisions that are solely based on automated processes, but  they do not regulate decision-making processes that are largely dependent on automated systems.  Given that most AI systems in use today are designed and deployed to assist, rather than replace, human decision-making in criminal justice systems, they largely fall outside the remit of EU data  protection laws on automated decisions. Secondly, the prohibition on automated decisions is subject  to broad exceptions. Individuals can be subject to decisions based solely on automated processes if  authorised by EU or Member State law, and there are deemed to be appropriate human rights  safeguards in place, including the right to obtain human intervention. However, there is not enough  clarity on what safeguards are needed, and how ‘human intervention’ should be interpreted.  
In order to regulate the use of AI in criminal justice proceedings, the EU must, at a minimum, set  standards to address the following questions: 
1) what standards are needed to govern the design and deployment of AI systems in criminal  justice systems;  
2) what safeguards are needed in criminal justice proceedings to make sure that AI systems are  used in accordance with human rights standards and prevent discrimination; and 
 
3) how Member States should govern the deployment of AI systems and monitor their  subsequent use.  
The design of AI systems and their deployment in criminal justice proceedings should be regulated to generate human rights compliant, non-discriminatory outcomes. Minimum standards and safeguards  should be set, which, if they cannot be adhered to, should preclude the use of the AI system in  question. AI should also be regulated so that they are sufficiently transparent and explainable to  enable effective independent scrutiny. AI systems should be designed and deployed to comply with  and give effect to inter alia the right of access to court, the right to be presumed innocent, and the  right to liberty. AI systems should not undermine the right to be tried by an impartial and independent  tribunal and, in line with existing EU laws, no individual should be subject to an automated decision  that results in a criminal record. AI systems should be designed so that they do not pre-designate an  individual as a criminal before trial, nor should they allow the police to take unjustified,  disproportionate measures against individuals without reasonable suspicion. AI systems that inform  criminal justice outcomes should, as a general rule, favour outcomes that are favourable to the  defendant. Where AI systems inform decisions on the deprivations of liberty, they should be calibrated  to generate outcomes that favour release, and they should not facilitate detention other than as a  measure of last resort. AI systems must be subject to rigorous testing to ensure that they have the  desired effect of reducing pre-trial detention rates. 
AI systems must be developed to guarantee that they do not generate discriminatory outcomes,  ensuring that suspects and accused persons are not disadvantaged, either directly or indirectly, on  account of their protected characteristics, including race, ethnicity, nationality or socioeconomic  background. AI systems should be subject to mandatory testing before and after deployment so that  any discriminatory impact can be identified and addressed. AI systems which cannot adhere to this  minimum standard should have no place in the criminal justice system. 
AI systems need to be transparent and explainable, so they can be understood and scrutinised by their  primary users, suspects and accused persons, and the general public. Commercial or proprietary  interests should never be a barrier to transparency. AI systems must be designed in a way that allows  criminal defendants to understand and contest the decisions made against them. It should be possible  to carry out an independent audit of each AI system, and its processes should be reproducible for that  purpose. 
Member States should have laws that govern how AI systems are relied upon in criminal proceedings,  and there must be adequate safeguards to prevent over-reliance on AI by decision-makers, to prevent  discrimination and to ensure scrutiny and effective challenge by the defence.  
Procedural safeguards should actively tackle automation-bias amongst criminal justice decision makers. Examples include:  
a) making it a legal requirement for decision-makers to be adequately alerted and informed  about the risks associated with AI systems; 
b) making AI systems’ assessments intelligible to decision-makers; 
c) requiring decision-makers to provide full, individualised reasoning for all decisions influenced  by an AI system; and 
d) making it easy for decision-makers to overrule AI assessments that produce unfavourable  outcomes for defendants.  
Criminal justice procedures should ensure that defendants are notified if an AI system has been used  which has or may have influenced a decision taken about them at any point in the criminal justice 

system, from investigation to arrest, from charge to conviction, and sentence. Procedures should  enable the full disclosure of all aspects of AI systems that are necessary for suspects and accused  persons to contest their findings. Disclosure should be in a form which is clear and comprehensible to  a layperson, without the need for technical or expert assistance, in order to ensure fairness, equality  of arms, and to discharge the obligations to provide all relevant information and be given reasons for  decisions under the right to a fair trial. Suspects and accused persons should also be given effective  access to technical experts who can help to analyse and challenge otherwise incomprehensible  aspects of AI systems. Training should be made available to all primary users of AI systems, and to  criminal defence practitioners, so that there is greater awareness of AI technology, and of the risks of  over-reliance on AI.  
Effective regulation of AI systems should be facilitated by a governance and monitoring framework.  AI systems should not be deployed unless they have undergone an independent public impact  assessment with the involvement of appropriate experts, that is specific both to the purpose for which  the AI system is deployed, and the locality where it is deployed. A requirement of the assessment  should be a consideration of whether it is necessary to use AI in the particular use case, or whether  an alternative solution could achieve the same aims.  
As far as it is possible to do so, AI systems should also be tested for impact pre-deployment, a part of  which should be the minimum requirement to prove that the AI system has no discriminatory impact,  either directly or indirectly, before it can be deployed. AI systems should be kept under regular review  post-deployment. Effective monitoring of AI systems is not possible unless there is sufficient data that  makes it possible to discern their real impact. In particular, Member States need to collect data that  allow them to identify discriminatory impacts of AI systems, including discrimination on the basis of  race and ethnicity. 

Background 
Rapid technological advancements in recent years have made artificial intelligence (‘AI’) an  increasingly prominent aspect of our lives.  
There are differences of opinion as to the definition of AI and its true meaning, but for the purposes  of this paper we are broadly referring to automated decision-making systems based on algorithms,  including machine-learning, which are used in the criminal justice system. 
There is little doubt that AI has great capacity to increase human potential and improve the lives of  many, but the increasing role of AI in assisting important public functions has also highlighted serious  risks and challenges. If not subject to proper regulation and oversight, AI can threaten fundamental  human rights and, far from expanding human potential, it can amplify and worsen harmful aspects of  our society, including inequality and injustice.  
This challenge is particularly evident where AI has been used to assist the administration of justice in  criminal cases. In recent years, more and more jurisdictions across the world have begun to use AI  technology to inform and assist policing and judicial decisions, often driven by perceptions about the  reliability and impartiality of technological solutions, and pressures to make cost-savings in policing  and court services. In some countries, algorithmic processes can influence which geographic  neighbourhoods should be subject to increased law enforcement and when, as well as which  individuals should be specifically targeted by law enforcement. They can help to determine whether  someone should be arrested, whether they should be charged with a criminal offence, whether they  should be detained in prison before trial and, if convicted and sentenced, the length of their sentence.  AI is being used more and more to influence highly sensitive, high impact decisions that have far reaching, long-term implications for individuals’ rights.  
Research emerging from the United States, where the use of AI in criminal justice is particularly  widespread, and from the United Kingdom and some EU Member States, however, seriously questions  whether AI has a positive influence on criminal justice systems. AI tools and systems have been found  to actively generate discriminatory criminal justice outcomes, they have been found to have little to  no positive influence on the quality of human decisions, and they have been criticised for poor design,  that does not reflect or give effect to human rights standards. These criticisms might not be justified  for all AI systems, but these studies highlight the need for much stronger regulatory frameworks to  govern the use of AI.  
We believe that unless it is subject to robust regulation, it is unlikely that AI can be used in criminal  justice systems without undermining the right to a fair trial. In some cases, it should be restricted from  use entirely. 
EU Member States should be encouraged to take a much more cautious approach to AI and subject  automated processes to more stringent rules that are designed to ensure human rights compliance. 
There is the potential for AI systems, if properly and robustly regulated, to have a positive impact on  criminal justice system, advancing human rights, for example, by analysing law enforcement or judicial  decisions to identify patterns of erroneous or poor decision-making, or discrimination.  
The EU is already a world leader on AI regulation, having adopted ground-breaking data protection  laws in recent years to shield individuals from automated decisions that have an adverse effect on  their rights. We welcome the EU’s commitment to build further on existing legal standards, and we  emphasise that addressing the impact of AI on criminal justice has to be a primary consideration for  EU policy makers when deciding on appropriate legal standards. Discussions around the impact of AI

on human rights have largely been centred on data protection, the right to privacy, and broader  questions of ethics and human dignity. However, despite the increasing use of AI systems in criminal  justice systems across the world, only limited discussions have so far focused on how these systems  impact the right to a fair trial, and what regulations are needed to address that impact.  
About this paper 
Fair Trials has produced this policy paper to highlight the need for EU-wide standards on the regulation  of AI in criminal justice, and to inform EU policy makers about the standards and safeguards needed  to ensure effective protection of fair trial rights where criminal justice decisions are assisted by AI.  
The EU Commission recognised that AI represents risks for fundamental rights, including the right to  a fair trial, in its 2020 White Paper, ‘On Artificial Intelligence – A European approach to excellence and  trust’. It also recognised the need for improvements to the EU’s legislative framework on AI, noting in  particular the challenges in the ‘effective application and enforcement of existing EU and national  legislation’ and the ‘limitations of scope of existing EU legislation’.  
In this paper, we identify the most common fair trial rights issues raised by existing AI systems, based  on examples and experiences from the EU, the United Kingdom, and the United States. We also offer  examples of practical legal and policy solutions that could help to address these challenges, and to  assist in the effective implementation of the EU’s fundamental rights standards in this area. We  recognise that the use of AI has a broader impact on human rights beyond the right to a fair trial, and  that there are important social and ethical issues that also need to be addressed. However, we have  narrowed the focus of this paper given Fair Trials’ mission and field of expertise. 
This paper should not be treated as an exhaustive list of fair trial rights standards that need to be  introduced. AI is used in many ways in criminal justice systems cross the world and, as the technology  continues to develop, it is likely that we will eventually see the deployment of AI technology in ways  never imagined before. This paper focuses primarily on AI systems that carry out individualised risk  assessments, given that these types of systems have had the most significant impact on individuals’  rights so far, and we envisage that similar systems will become increasingly common in the near  future. 

Existing EU Legal Framework 
Existing EU laws restrict the use of automated decisions in a wide variety of contexts. Article 22 of the  General Data Protection Regulation (‘GDPR’) provides that data subjects have the right not to be  subject to decisions ‘solely’ based on automated processes, where they produce ‘legal effects’  concerning them, or where they ‘similarly significantly affect’ them. The Law Enforcement Directive  (‘LED’) – the EU data legislation that governs the processing of data for criminal justice purposes – has  a very similar provision at Article 11, which requires Member States to prohibit decisions based solely  on automated processing, where they produce ‘adverse legal effects’ on the individual, or effects that  are ‘similarly significant’.  
However, there are two notable gaps in the existing legislative framework governing automated  decision-making systems under both the GDPR and the LED. These ambiguities and potential  loopholes could be exploited in ways that seriously undermine the general prohibition of automated  decision-making processes, and adversely impact human rights. It is necessary, therefore, that the EU  provides further guidance on how these provisions should be interpreted, including thorough  legislation (if appropriate) to further clarify the circumstances in which Member States are allowed to  deploy AI systems for criminal justice proceedings.  
Firstly, the provisions in the GDPR and LED only prohibit decisions based ‘solely’ on automated  processes. In other words, the laws regulate the impact of decisions made through automated  processing, but not the AI systems themselves. As discussed later in this paper, the main human rights  challenges of AI systems can be attributed to how they are designed and trained, and the types of  technology used, such as machine-learning, so it is crucial that decisions about the design and  deployment of AI systems are also regulated.  
Secondly, neither the GDPR or LED provide regulatory standards to govern situations where  automated processing is not the ‘sole’ basis of a decision, but a primary influencer. In reality, the  difference between a fully automated decision and a decision made with a ‘human-in-the-loop’ is not  always clear, but because of this strict classification, AI systems are able to be used and have significant  legal effects without the corresponding safeguards. Stronger legal standards are needed to make sure  that semi-automated decision-making processes do not become de facto automated processes. 
Thirdly, the prohibition on automated decision-making is subject to two very broad exceptions.  Automated decisions are prohibited under the GDPR and LED, ‘unless authorised by Union or Member  State law’ and there need to be ‘appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of the data  subject, at least the right to obtain human intervention’.1 These provisions give extremely wide  discretion to Member States to override the general prohibition. It is significant that EU laws  emphasise the need for human rights safeguards, and the need to ensure the possibility of human  interventions, but neither of these concepts have yet been adequately defined. Although influential  actors like the EU and the Council of Europe have established principles on the ethical and responsible  use of AI, there is currently no authoritative guidance on the practical safeguards that need to be in  place.2Likewise, the meaning of ‘human intervention’ is open to interpretation. LED provides some  guidance on who should be carrying out the human intervention,3 but there needs to be greater clarity  on what meaningful human intervention entails in different contexts. 
In order to regulate the use of AI in criminal justice proceedings, and close the gaps in existing data  protection laws, the EU must, at a minimum, set standards to address the following questions: 
1) what standards are needed to govern the design and deployment of AI systems in criminal  justice systems;  
2) what safeguards are needed in criminal justice proceedings to make sure that AI systems are  used in accordance with human rights standards and prevent discrimination; and  3) how Member States should govern the deployment of AI systems and monitor their  subsequent use.

Part 1: Regulating the Design and Deployment of AI Systems in Criminal Justice Systems 
AI systems deployed to assist criminal justice decision-making have to be fit-for-purpose. The purposes  of AI systems differ depending on the context in which they are deployed, but there are a few common  considerations that need to be taken into account to determine whether it is appropriate for the AI  system to be used.  
Firstly, AI systems have to be designed to produce outcomes that are desirable from a human rights  and non-discrimination perspective. This means that rather than being exclusively focused on  delivering ‘accurate’ outcomes in criminal cases, AI systems have to be designed to facilitate fair,  impartial and non-discriminatory criminal processes. Developers of AI systems and public entities that  commission them should, in particular, make sure that AI systems are consciously designed to give  effect to, and promote the right to fair trial. The fundamental issues with the way AI systems are  designed and built, resulting in discriminatory outcomes, must also be considered. Given the  significant evidence of AI systems influencing discriminatory outcomes, special efforts must be made  to ensure that AI systems do not produce discriminatory outcomes.  
Secondly, AI systems need to be designed in a way that makes it possible for criminal defendants and  the broader public to scrutinise them. This means that AI systems should not only be made open to  scrutiny (rather than concealed to protect commercial interests), but their inner workings and  processes should also be discernible and comprehensible.  
AI Systems should be designed to protect and promote the right to a fair trial 
Where AI systems are used to assist or inform criminal justice decisions, they support an important  act of public administration that has a significant impact on the rights of suspects and accused persons.  AI systems do more than just provide outputs that decision-makers can take into consideration as  evidence. By attempting to mimic human analytical processes and reasoning, they can provide  influential advisory input into human decision-making, or even replace it altogether. As such, it is right  that human rights standards that govern criminal justice decision-making also apply to AI systems. 
The Council of Europe and the EU Commission’s High Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (‘AI  HLEG’) have both recognised that fundamental rights should be a key guiding principle for the design  and deployment of AI systems.4 The Council of Europe recommends that AI systems are built according  to ‘human rights by design’ principles, and recognises that AI systems should not undermine the right  to a fair trial under the European Convention on Human Rights (‘ECHR’). The AI HLEG has similarly  recognised that the respect for fundamental rights, as enshrined in the EU Charter of Fundamental  Rights and international human rights instruments, should form the foundations of trustworthy AI. AI  HLEG’s Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI (‘the Ethics Guidelines’) also recognise the need for AI  systems to comply with other types of EU legislation. Although not mentioned explicitly in the Ethics  Guidelines, Fair Trials would emphasise that the design of AI systems and the ways in which they are  deployed in the EU should, in particular, be compatible with the standards set out in the procedural rights directives under the ‘Roadmap for strengthening procedural rights of suspected or accused  persons in criminal proceedings’.5 
We would also like to note the potential for AI systems to have a positive impact on criminal justice  systems. Public debate about the relationship between AI and human rights have predominantly been  centred on the idea that AI is a threat to human rights. It is equally important, as technology takes an  increasingly prominent role in public life, to consider what positive potential they may have. Policy 
makers, developers, civil society activists, and other stakeholders should try to identify ways in which  AI can also play an active role in advancing human rights, and improve the fairness of criminal justice  systems. For example, AI systems could be used to analyse law enforcement or judicial decisions to  identify patterns of erroneous or poor decision-making, or discrimination, for preventative purposes.  
AI systems which are used as part of criminal justice decision-making should be designed not just to  ensure that they do not undermine the right to a fair trial, but also to promote it. However, as  explained below, given the embedded biases in the criminal data used to develop and train AI systems,  there are serious doubts, based on recent studies, whether AI systems can promote fair criminal  justice at all.  
There are various aspects of the right to a fair trial and, without speculating on what kind of AI systems  will be developed in the future to support criminal justice decision-making, it is difficult to articulate  how fair trial rights standards should inform the design of AI systems. However, examples of AI  systems currently deployed in the EU and elsewhere suggest that there are certain aspects of the right  to a fair trial that require special attention. These are: 
a) the right of access to court 
b) the presumption of innocence; 
c) the principle of the equality of arms; and  
d) the right to liberty.  
Access to Court 
The notion of AI systems replacing courts to determine the guilt or innocence of the accused may  seem far-fetched at present, but there is a growing trend of automated administration of justice across  the world that might threaten the right of access to court. For example, in several European countries,  speeding and other minor traffic offences have been detected and enforced by means of automated  processes for more than a decade.6 Although nominally criminal processes, these types of proceedings  are, in reality, normally administrative in nature, and they rarely have a ‘significant’ impact on the  rights of individuals. However, as surveillance technology develops, thanks to AI, there is a real  likelihood that the scope of crimes punishable by way of automation will increase.7 
In the United Kingdom, the government announced plans in 2017 that would enable defendants to  enter guilty pleas via an online portal after viewing the charges and evidence against them, for a small number of minor offences.8 Under this procedure, known as ‘automatic online conviction’, defendants  would be automatically convicted and fined without any judicial oversight if they accept the charges  against them. Although it is debatable whether this system can truly be characterised as an AI system,  it is an example of the automated administration of criminal justice, that replaces a function usually  played by courts.  
It is worrying that the UK government has proposed expanding this scheme to other ‘non imprisonable’ offences, if itis regarded as a success.9Fair Trials has outlined concerns about expanding  the scope of cases where accused persons can be convicted without judicial oversight, even if such  procedures are reserved solely for minor, non-imprisonable offences.10 The impacts of a criminal  conviction, even for a minor offence, can be numerous, long-term, and hard to predict, affecting inter  alia job prospects, educational opportunities, and immigration status. It is crucial that what amounts  to ‘legal effects’ and ‘similar significant effects’ concerning the data subject for the purposes of  automated decision-making are interpreted very broadly.11 In particular, given that a criminal record  always has a ‘legal’ or ‘significant’ effect, any automated decision-making process that directly results  in a criminal record should be prohibited.  
AI systems should not undermine the right to be tried by an impartial and independent tribunal,  and in line with existing EU laws, no individual should be subject to an automated decision that  resultsin their being held in custody or detention, gives them a criminal record, or which determines  a criminal sentence or sanction. No individual should be subject to an automated decision which  engages their human rights without meaningful human input. 
Presumption of Innocence 
The right to be presumed innocent in criminal proceedings is a basic human right, and one that is  expressly recognised in, and safeguarded by EU law under Directive 2016/343 (the ‘Presumption of  Innocence Directive’).12 The increasing use of AI in the sphere of criminal justice, however, raises  questions about the scope of this right, and how AI systems should be built and used to protect it.  Concerns about how AI systems undermine the presumption of innocence have been voiced in the  context of certain types of predictive policing software.13 
A variety of predictive policing tools that aim to facilitate preventative policing measures and to deter  crimes before they have taken place have been developed and deployed across Europe.14 Tools which  predict the time and place where certain crimes are likely to take place have been used in many European countries. Similar tools have also been developed to identify potential suspects, which are  used widely in the US, and now increasingly in Europe.15 
An example is the ‘Strategic Subject List’ in Chicago, a police database of around 400,000 local  residents who were assigned threat scores that determine the likelihood that they will commit  crimes.16 The algorithms used to generate these scores were not open to the public, so the exact  process by which individual risk levels were assessed were not known. Despite this lack of  transparency, it is clear that threat scores generated by the software had significant impacts on  individuals’ rights – in particular, their right to privacy. Individuals with higher threat scores were, for  example, more likely to be subject to targeted police surveillance, or home visits – as though they  were officially recognised as predisposed to commit crimes, irrespective of any credible suspicion of  wrongdoing.17 The Strategic Subject List was decommissioned in January 2020 by the Chicago police  who cited ineffectiveness as the primary reason for the decision.18 
These types of predictive policing tools are now being used in Europe. In the United Kingdom, a  coalition of police forces have been developing a system not dissimilar to the Strategic Subject List,  that aims to identify individuals who are likely to commit crimes.19 Known as the National Data  Analytics Solution (‘NDAS’), this risk assessment tool uses statistical analysis and machine-learning to  inform policing decisions, and to facilitate ‘early interventions’ where appropriate.20 The sources of  data that the system uses to conduct its risk assessments raise concerns that the system will be built  to profile individuals on the basis of very sensitive, personal information, including stop and search  data, data from social services, and the National Health Service.21 Where this data is used to indicate  the likelihood of individuals’ criminality, it will inevitably flag up people whose profiles fit those who are over-represented in that data as being higher risk. It is particularly worrying that an individual  might be profiled for policing purposes on the basis of their health conditions or their access to  essential services, such as welfare or benefits. These factors should not be regarded as relevant factors  for determining whether someone may commit criminal offences. 
Also in the UK, the Metropolitan Police in London operates a database called the Gangs Matrix, which  contains information and risk-assessments on individuals who are alleged ‘gang’ members.22 This  database was created using criminal justice data, including police and crime records. The Gangs Matrix  and the assessments it produces assists policing decisions, including the deployment of stop and  search, and further enforcement action, such as imprisonment and deportation. A further tactic  resulting from the risk assessments made by the Gangs Matrix is the threat of eviction or exclusion from education, as names and details of these alleged gang members have been shared with education, healthcare and housing providers.23 
In the Netherlands, the government has been running an algorithmic risk assessment tool, ProKid 12- SI, which purports to assess the risk of criminality of 12-year-old children since 2009.24 ProKid uses  existing police data on these children, such as reports of where children have come into contact with  the police, their addresses, information about their ‘living environment’, even including whether they  are victims of violence, to identify them as being in one of four categories of ‘risk’ of committing crimes in future.25 The system assesses children based on their relationships with other people and their  supposed risk levels, meaning that individuals can be deemed higher risk by being linked to another  individual with a high risk assessment, such as a sibling or a friend.26 Parents’ assessed risk can also  impact a child’s risk level. ProKid’s algorithms assess risks in relation to future actions that the children  have not yet carried out, and judges them on the basis of the actions of others close to them.27 These  risk assessments result in police ‘registering’ these children on their systems and monitoring them,  and then referring them to youth ‘care’ services.28 ProKid frames children as potential perpetrators  even when they are registered as victims of violence; which has serious implications on their presumption of innocence.29 
Several similar tools are also used in the Netherlands, including the Reference Index for High Risk  Youth, a large-scale risk assessment system that focuses on assessing under-23-year-olds.30 
Predictive policing tools like NDAS, ProKid and the Gangs Matrix can be regarded as part of a broader  trend in law enforcement that moves away from ‘reactive’ policing, and towards ‘preventative’ or  ‘proactive’ policing.31 NDAS and other similar predictive policing tools intend to pursue legitimate  objectives of preventing, or reducing harm,32 but there are serious concerns that these systems single out individuals as ‘pre-criminals’, who are subject to police interventions even though they are not  formally suspected of any crime, and there is no evidence that they have done anything wrong.33 It is  of further concern that these types of predictive policing tools do not necessarily designate individuals’  risk levels on the basis of their past actions, or behaviour that can be regarded as ‘suspicious’ in any way, but on account of factors far beyond their control, and immutable characteristics. In particular,  there is strong evidence to suggest that AI systems have a tendency to overestimate the risks of  criminality of certain ethnic and racial groups. For example, out of 3,800 people on the Gangs Matrix,  80% are 12-24 years old, and 78% of them are black – a clearly disproportionate and discriminatory proportion. The discriminatory impact of AI in criminal justice systems is discussed in further detail in  the following section. 
Although predictive policing tools do not directly ‘convict’ people, they not only allow the police to  treat legally innocent individuals as pseudo-criminals, but they can also result individuals being  deprived of their basic rights with regard to education, housing, and other public services – effectively  ‘punishing’ them on account of their profiles. This seriously damages the fundamental human rights  principle that the matter of guilt or innocence can only be determined by means of a fair and lawful  criminal justice process.34 
While it is clear that certain types of predictive policing can infringe the presumption of innocence  from a moral and ethical viewpoint, it is debatable whether these systems also violate the legal  presumption of innocence under EU law and international human rights law. The Presumption of  Innocence Directive applies to natural persons who are ‘suspects’ and ‘accused persons’, from the  moment they are suspected or accused of a crime.35 However, there is some ambiguity about the  exact stage at which an individual attains the status of a ‘suspect’ under the Presumption of Innocence  Directive,36 and about whether the scope of the Presumption of Innocence Directive extends to  decisions to designate an individual as a suspect (or a ‘pre-criminal’). On the other hand, the ECHR appears to have taken a clearer position that measures undertaken pre-charge, as a general rule, fall  outside the scope of the presumption of innocence.37 It has also held that preventative measures, such  as surveillance, do not amount to criminal sanctions for the purposes of Article 6 ECHR.38 
Even if the current language on the presumption of innocence is such that it is not directly applicable  to the predictive policing context, it must be recognised that these tools nevertheless interfere with  human rights. In particular, the targeted surveillance that results from predictive policing has clear  implications on the right to privacy. The acceptable degree to which criminal justice processes can  interfere with this right is a matter that might require clearer articulation, as is the question of the  impact of Article 8 ECHR violations on criminal proceedings.  
AI systems that inform charging decisions have also been developed and deployed. An example of this  is the Harm Assessment Risk Tool (‘HART’) currently being used by Durham Constabulary in the United  Kingdom. HART uses a machine-learning algorithm to assess a suspect’s risk of reoffending, using over  thirty variables that characterise an individual’s criminal history and socio-demographic background.  The risk assessments conducted by HART are used by the local police to determine whether an  individual should be charged, or diverted into a rehabilitation programme. HART does not determine  whether an individual is guilty or innocent, but its assessment can trigger a chain of events that can  result in the deprivation of liberty, and/or a criminal conviction. Charging decisions should surely be  based on the merits of individual cases, and it is difficult to imagine how decisions on entry into  diversion programmes can be made by means other than a careful consideration of individual circumstances. These types of high impact, fact-sensitive decisions should never be delegated to  automated processes, particularly those which operate by identifying correlations rather than causal  links between an individual’s characteristics and their likely behaviour.  
An examination of HART also reveals flaws in how the tool is designed. HART is calibrated to err on  the side of caution,39 because it regards under-estimations of risk levels as a more serious error than  over-estimations, so that under-estimations occur less frequently. In other words, HART is deliberately  designed to underestimate who is eligible for entry into the diversion programme, so it is predisposed  to over-criminalise. This approach conflicts with the notion that any doubt in a criminal case should  be interpreted in favour of the defendant (‘in dubio reo’).40 A human rights compliant approach to  criminal justice decision-making would do the opposite of what HART does – it would need to err on  the side of the defendant.  
AI systems should respect the presumption of innocence and they must be designed so that they do  not pre-designate an individual as a criminal before trial, nor should they allow or assist the police  to take unjustified, disproportionate measures against individuals without reasonable suspicion. AI  systems that inform criminal justice outcomes should, as a general rule, favour outcomes that are  favourable to the defendant. 
Equality of Arms 
A major concern raised in the studies of certain AI systems is that they are inaccessible for adequate  scrutiny by defendants and their lawyers. This has serious implications for the principle of equality of  arms and the right to an adversarial process, because without information about how a decision is  made, it is difficult to envisage how defendants can question the accuracy and legality of the decision.  The need for AI systems used in criminal justice to be transparent, explainable and understandable to  all is addressed in more detail below. 
The Right to Liberty 
In the United States, ‘risk-assessment’ tools that use AI technology have been used to assist pre-trial  assessments that determine whether a defendant should be released on bail, or held on remand pending their trial. Examples of risk-assessment tools currently being used in the United States include  COMPAS, the Public Safety Assessment (‘PSA’), and the Federal Pre-Trial Risk Assessment Instrument  (‘PTRA’). Many of these tools are also used to inform decisions on parole and sentencing.  
These tools have, however, been subject to intense criticism for several reasons. Studies have shown  inter alia that risk assessments make inaccurate predictions that are no better than those made by  non-expert humans. They do not result in a significant reduction in pre-trial detention rates, and that  they produce disparate outcomes for different racial groups. The US-based NGO Partnership on AI has  found that AI risk assessment tools currently being used in the United States are unfit for use in pre trial assessments, and it has recommended that policymakers cease the deployment of risk  assessment tools until such time that the challenges affecting such tools have been adequately  addressed.41 
The adoption of pre-trial risk-assessments tools in the United States has largely been driven by the  desire to address high imprisonment rates in the country by making pre-trial decision-making fairer.  
In particular, these tools have been promoted as an alternative to cash bail – a system often criticised  for disadvantaging poorer defendants and worsening social injustices.42 Cash bail is a relatively rare  concept in the EU, but there are concerns about the quality of pre-trial detention decisions in many  Member States, which have been criticised for failing to carry out case-specific reviews and fully  consider alternatives to detention.43  
We are currently unaware of any attempts in EU Member States to introduce algorithmic risk  assessments to supplement or replace existing pre-trial decision-making processes. However, it is  possible that risk-assessment tools will also be recommended as a solution to address the pre-trial  detention challenge in Europe, especially given that many of these tools are developed by private  companies that actively market their products to governments and local police forces.  
Risk-assessment tools are usually designed to assess the likelihood of re-arrest, and/or of failure to  turn up to court after being released based on the profiles of the defendant. Based on these  assessments, risk assessment tools either assign risk levels to defendants, or they provide direct advice  to decision-makers on whether or not the defendant should be released. There is only limited research  about the extent to which pre-trial risk-assessment tools influence judges’ decisions in practice,44 but  concerns have been raised about the ability of AI systems to recommend detention at all.45 There is a  risk that recommendations made by AI systems to detain individuals compromise the presumption of  release. This is a particularly valid concern in light of research suggesting that decision-makers have a  tendency to err on the side of caution when they are ‘advised’ by AI systems, and that they have a  greater propensity to override risk assessment tools to detain, rather than release defendants.46 Pre trial detention should always be a measure of last resort, and no risk-assessment can be regarded as  human rights compliant, unless it recommends its users to consider detention as a measure of last  resort, after all other alternatives have been fully considered. 
Pre-trial risk assessment tools in the United States and elsewhere have also been criticised for  (unintentionally) over-estimating risks, because of the nature of the data used to train its algorithms.  
Pre-trialrisk assessment tools typically rely only on data regarding individuals who have been released,  and they ignore those who were detained, but would have otherwise ‘succeeded’ by not being  arrested, and by appearing in court.47 In other words, algorithms are based on the assumption that  individuals who have been detained by courts in the past have been rightfully deprived of their liberty.  Any AI system developed to assist pre-trial detention decision-making must be designed to give effect  to the presumption in favour of release. This means that risk-assessment tools need to be deliberately  calibrated to generate outcomes that favourable to the defendant. Data used to train the AI system  should be carefully scrutinised so that it reflects the inevitable fact that a significant proportion of  individuals in pre-trial detention have been deprived of their liberty in violation of their human rights.
Studies of pre-trial risk-assessment tools used in the United States cast doubt on their effectiveness  at reducing pre-trial detention rates, and their ability to make accurate predictions of risks. A study in  Kentucky, for example, found that the likelihood of defendants being released within the first three  days of their arrest went down after the risk-assessment tool was deployed, and that there were no  significant changes in the number of re-arrests and failure-to-appear rates amongst defendants  released on bail during the same period.48 This was the case even after the risk-assessment tool was  modified post-deployment to improve the accuracy of predictions. Another study has found that the  COMPAS risk-assessment tool is no better at predicting the likelihood of defendants reoffending than  non-expert human volunteers.49 These studies do not necessarily prove that AI systems are incapable  of reducing pre-trial detention rates at all, but they do raise questions about their usefulness, and they  strongly challenge claims that algorithmic risk-assessment tools help to improve the quality of pre trial detention decisions. They also highlight the need for post-deployment testing and monitoring of  AI systems, to ensure that they have the desired effect of ensuring that individuals are detained only  as a measure of last resort. 
Post-trial assessment systems are also being increasingly used, for purposes such as assisting with sentencing decisions or prisoner release. 
In England and Wales, the Prison and Probation Service has developed and operates the Offender  Assessment System (OASys), an automated risk-assessment tool.50 It assesses the risk of harm  offenders pose to others and how likely an offender is to reoffend, as well as assessing offender needs.  These risk assessments are used to decide ‘interventions’ and to influence the sentence plans given  to offenders.51 Millions of these assessments have been carried out.52 The system collates information  on offenders’ previous offences, education, training, employment, alcohol and drug misuse; as well as  their ‘attitudes’, ‘thinking and behaviour’, ‘relationships’, and ‘lifestyle’.53 This data is used alongside  the individual’s offending record and ‘offender demographic information’ to inform two predictive  algorithms: OASys General Reoffending Predictor (OGP1) and OASys Violence Predictor (OVP1).54 A  2014 National Offender Management Service analysis found that the OGP1 and OVP1 generated  different predictions based on race and gender. They found that relative predictive validity was better  for white offenders than for Asian, black, or mixed ethnicity offenders. The Offender Group  Reconviction Scale (OGRS) is another algorithmic risk assessment tool, which is used in England and  Wales to assess and predict an offender’s likelihood of reoffending.55 The OGRS algorithm uses data on the individual’s official criminal history, as well as their age and gender, to produce a risk score  between 0 and 1 of how likely an offender is to reoffend within one or two years. 
The use of these AI systems in a post-trial setting, and the documented differences in predictive  outcomes based on, among other factors, race, highlight the clear need for strict testing and  monitoring of such systems. These systems used in a post-trial setting could very easily be transferred  to a pre-trial risk assessment setting; the principles and aims of these systems and the data used are  very similar. For example, the COMPAS system, mentioned above and considered in more detail  below, was originally designed as a recidivism risk assessment tool, and is also used as a pre-trial risk  assessment tool. 56 
Where AI systems inform decisions on the deprivations of liberty, they should be calibrated to  generate outcomes that favour release, and they should not facilitate detention other than as a  measure of last resort. AI systems must be subject to rigorous testing to ensure they have the  desired effect of reducing rates of pre-trial detention rates. 
AI systems should be designed to be non-discriminatory 
One of the most frequent criticisms of AI systems and their use in criminal justice systems is that they  can lead to discriminatory outcomes, especially along racial and ethnic lines.  
The best-known example of this is a study by the US media outlet ProPublica into COMPAS, a risk assessment tool designed to predict the likelihood of reoffending in Broward County in Florida.  ProPublica found that COMPAS was 77% more likely to rate black defendants as ‘high-risk’ than white  defendants, and it was almost twice as likely to mislabel white defendants as lower risk than black  defendants.57 
The dangers of the failure to adequately regulate the use of AI to prevent discrimination have also  been witnessed in Europe. The ‘Crime Anticipation System’ (‘CAS’), a predictive policing software  being used across the Netherlands, was initially designed to consider ethnicity as a relevant factor for  determining the likelihood of a crime being committed. Amongst the indicators used by CAS to predict  crimes in a particular area was the number of ‘non-Western allochtones’ in the area – in other words,  ‘non-Western’ individuals with at least one foreign-born parent.58 The software not only presupposed  the existence of a correlation between ethnicity and crime, but also singled out a category of  ethnicities to be of particular concern, given that the presence of ‘Western’, ‘autochtone’ individuals  were not used as indicators. Furthermore, given that ‘Western’ was defined somewhat subjectively  (for example, including individuals of Japanese or Indonesian origin, and including all European  nationalities, apart from Turkish), CAS incorporated highly questionable societal categorisations and  biases. 
In the United Kingdom, a major criticism of HART has been that it included data collated and classified  by a private company for marketing purposes that could very easily to biased outcomes. HART relied  on the ‘Mosaic’ code developed by a consumer credit reporting company, that categorised individuals  into various groups according to inter alia their ethnic origin, income, and education levels. It was of particular concern that some socio-demographic categories used by Mosaic were blatantly racialised,  including, for example, ‘Asian Heritage’, which stereotyped individuals of ‘Asian’ origin as being  unemployed or having low-paid jobs, and living with extended families.59 
In Denmark, an automated algorithmic assessment has been used to classify different  neighbourhoods, based on criteria such as unemployment, crime rates, educational attainment, and  other ‘risk indicators’, as well as whether the levels of first and second-generation migrants in the  population is more than 50%. Neighbourhoods which meet these criteria are classified as ‘ghettos’.  These neighbourhoods are then subject to special measures, including higher punishments for  crimes.60 It is clearly discriminatory, as well as entirely unfair, for people living in certain areas to be  punished more severely than others in different areas for the same crimes. 
Further examples of criminal justice AI which have been identified as producing discriminatory  outcomes include the previously mentioned OASys, NDAS and the Gangs Matrix in the UK, and the  Netherland’s ProKid 12.  
These examples illustrate the need for regulations to ensure that AI systems are designed to be non discriminatory, and to exclude categorisations and classifications that deepen and legitimise social  biases and stereotypes. However, policy makers should not assume that making AI systems blind to  all protected characteristics will always help to produce non-discriminatory outcomes. In certain  scenarios, the removal of protected characteristics from the data could worsen discrimination. For  example, it has been suggested on the basis of research into COMPAS in the United States, that  excluding gender as a variable for risk assessments would fail to reflect a well-established statistical  fact that in most countries, women are less likely to reoffend than men.61 Making COMPAS gender 
blind would unfairly and inaccurately assume women to be as equally likely to reoffend as men, and  discriminate against them by overestimating their risk scores.  
Removing visible biases from AI systems cannot be the sole or primary solution to their discriminatory  impact, because AI systems can be biased even if they have not been deliberately designed in that  way. Bias is often unintentional, and even if the AI system appears on the surface to be neutral, their  algorithms can lead to discriminatory assessments and outcomes. COMPAS, for example, does not  include race or ethnicity as a variable, yet research has found that it consistently gives black  defendants higher risk scores than their white counterparts, making them less likely to be released  from detention.62 
Hidden biases can arise in AI systems in numerous ways. Although a comprehensive analysis of how  they can cause unintentional biases are beyond the scope of this paper,63 the way in which AI systems are themselves created and built illustrate the difficulty, complexity, and sometimes impossibility, in  preventing discriminatory outputs and effects of AI systems.  
There are fundamental issues with the way AI systems are designed and created which can lead to  bias. Where the AI system is based on machine-learning, biases can result from faults in the data that  is used to train its algorithms. Machine learning systems ‘learn’ how to make assessments or decisions  on the basis of their analysis of data to which they have previously been exposed. However, the data  used to train a machine learning system might be incomplete, inaccurate, or selected for improper  reasons, and this could lead to AI systems producing unwanted outcomes. What amounts to  appropriate, good quality data for the purpose of training algorithms depends on what the machine  learning system is being designed to do,64 so it might not always be obvious which dataset is needed  to train algorithms to be non-discriminatory. 
AI designed or created for use in the criminal justice system will almost inevitably use data which is  heavily reliant on, or entirely from within, the criminal justice system itself, such as policing or crime  records. This data does not represent an accurate record of criminality, but is merely a record of  policing – the crimes, locations and groups that are policed within that society, rather than the actual  occurrence of crime. The data might not be categorised or deliberately manipulated to yield  discriminatory results, but it may reflect the structural biases and inequalities in the society which the  data represents.  
Where there are discriminatory policing patterns targeting certain demographics, or the systematic  under-reporting and systematic over-reporting of certain types of crime and in certain locations,65 the  use of such data merely results in a reinforcing and re-entrenching of those inequalities and  discriminationin criminal justice outcomes. For example, according to UK crime data, black people are  over 9 times more likely to be stopped and searched than white people,66 and black men are more  than 3 times more likely to be arrested than white men.67 Despite these statistics, NDAS (mentioned  above) in the United Kingdom explicitly relies on stop and search data to determine an individual’s  propensity to commit a criminal offence. The fact that stop and search is disproportionately used  against black people means that there will inevitably be an overrepresentation of black people in NDAS  and that their risk levels will be inflated in comparison to white people.  
Comparable statistics on stop and search are not available in most EU Member States, where the  official collection of racially disaggregated criminal justice data is either forbidden by law, or not  standard practice. However, recent studies show that racially biased policing practices are prevalent  throughout the EU. Data collected from a survey by the Fundamental Rights Agency, for example, has shown that during a 5-year period, 66% of individuals of Sub-Saharan African origin in Austria, and  over half of respondents of South Asian origin in Greece were stopped and searched.68 
AI built on data embedded with such biases and used to assist, inform, or make decisions in the  criminal justice system, can expand and entrench the biases represented in the data.69 When AI  systems result in criminal justice outcomes which repeat the discrimination inherent in the historic  data, such as targeting individuals from a particular demographic, that decision will itself be preserved  in the data. This leads to self-perpetuating ‘feedback loops’ which reinforce patterns of inequality.70 
Another way in which AI systems can produce unintentional biases is by way of proxies. Data used by  AI systems might be classified in seemingly legitimate ways, but those classifications can sometimes  act as proxies for protected characteristics. A common example used to illustrate this point is how  home addresses or postcodes can be proxies for race or ethnicity.71 Certain AI systems, such as HART,  were initially trained to find correlations between home addresses and the risk of reoffending – in  other words, to identify which postcode areas have ‘higher-risk’ residents than others.72 This approach  overlooks the fact that there is very pronounced ethnic residential segregation in many countries,73 making it highly probable in practice, for AI systems to inadvertently establish a link between ethnic  origin and risk. 
Roma are especially vulnerable to this form of proxy discrimination, given that in many EU Member  States, Roma are reported to live primarily in segregated areas inhabited mostly or exclusively by  Roma.74 
There are several ways in which AI systems can be designed to mitigate the risks of discrimination,  including by identifying and excluding data classifications that act as proxies for protected  characteristics.75 However, it can be difficult in practice to identify which variables are proxies for  protected characteristics (and how they do so), and removing too many ‘offending’ variables might  result in the AI system losing much of its functional utility.76 There is no one-size-fits-all method of  ensuring that AI systems do not produce discriminatory outcomes. Different approaches to de-biasing  AI systems can conflict with one another, and the suitability of a particular de-biasing method might  depend on the AI tool itself, and the legal and policy context in which it is designed to operate.77 Biases in AI systems are often not easy to detect and, in many cases, it might also be difficult to pinpoint  flaws either in the system itself, or in the training data that has been caused the bias. The structural  bias within the data that AI systems are built and operated on, a bias which is particularly deep-rooted  in criminal justice data, is a fundamental issue, and one which is likely to result in AI systems being  fundamentally inoperable – both because the bias makes them morally and ethically inoperable, if not  yet legally, and because any attempts to remove the bias will make the data to operate these systems  unusable.  
Fair Trials’ view is that the only effective way in which AI systems can be regarded as non discriminatory is if they have been subject to rigorous independent testing for biases. These tests must  be mandated by law, must be independently run, have clearly stated aims or objectives, and be carried  out pre-deployment to reduce the likelihood of individuals being affected by discriminatory profiling  and decisions. AI can be tested in advance of deployment by using test data – datasets which are either  synthetic datasets,78 or by using historic data with permissions – running it through an AI system, and  analysing the outputs.79 For example, a trial of retrospective facial recognition video analysis is being  run by a police oversight Ethics Committee in the UK. The trial is using historic data – CCTV footage – 
as the basis for simulated investigations in a controlled environment, monitored by researchers. The  trial has clearly stated aims and signifiers of success, and all outcomes will be examined. There are  significant human rights, data protection and ethical concerns involved with this particular technology,  including the right to privacy, and the testing is not being conducted independently as it should be but, as above, there are positive aspects of the testing methodology.80 
An alternative could be to ‘test’ a system in a strictly academic sense by running it alongside actual  criminal justice processes, but with the system not having any effect on decision-making, and  analysing the system’s proposed decisions or outcomes for bias.  
AI should never be used or even ‘tested’ in real-world situations where they have actual effects on  individuals or criminal justice outcomes, before they have been tested. These types of tests also need  to be carried out in the broader context of an AI governance framework that not only analyses the  potential impact of the AI system pre-deployment, but also continues to monitor its impact  afterwards. 
If these tests are not carried out, and/or if an AI system cannot be proven to be non-discriminatory, it  should be legally precluded from deployment. However, as explained in the final section of this paper,  it is questionable whether such tests are feasible in many Member States, where local laws prohibit  the collection of racially-disaggregated data.  
AI systems should be developed to generate non-discriminatory outcomes, ensuring that suspects  and accused persons are not disadvantaged, either directly or indirectly, on account of their  protected characteristics, including race or ethnicity. AI systems should be subject to mandatory  testing before and after deployment so that any discriminatory impact can be identified and addressed. If an AI system cannot be proven not to generate discriminatory outcomes, it should not  be used. 
AI Systems need to be transparent and explainable 
AI systems can have a significant influence over criminal justice decisions, and they should be open to  public scrutiny in the same way that all decision-making processes by public entities should be.  However, a common criticism of many AI systems is that they lack transparency, which often makes it  difficult, if not outright impossible, to subject them to meaningful impartial analysis and criticism. This  lack of transparency is both as a result of deliberate efforts to conceal the inner workings of AI systems  for legal or profit-driven reasons, and of the nature of the technology used to build AI systems that is  uninterpretable for most, if not all humans.  
There are several reasons why it is necessary for AI systems to be transparent. Firstly, transparency is  essential for strengthening confidence of both primary users of the system, as well as the general  public, in AI systems. Democratic values demand that the public needs to be aware of how powerful  public institutions, such as the police and the judiciary, operate so that they can be held accountable  for their actions. It is also crucial for primary users of AI systems to understand how they work, so that  they can make informed decisions about how much influence they should have on criminal justice  decisions.  
Secondly, decisions made by AI systems need to be contestable at an individual level. Standards on  the right to a fair trial and the right to liberty demand that defendants should have access to materials  that inform decisions regarding them, so that they can challenge the accuracy and lawfulness of those  decisions.  
Transparency also acts as a safeguard against bias and inaccuracies. It is difficult to imagine how issues  that undermine the fairness and accuracies of AI systems (such as racial biases) can be detected, and  ultimately fixed, if they cannot be properly accessed and analysed. As explained above, certain AI  systems, such as CAS, have been found to have serious, but very obvious, flaws. In CAS’s case,  however, the fault in the software could be detected easily, which meant that the discriminatory impact of the tool could be mitigated. The indicator for ‘non-Western allochtones’ in CAS was removed  in 2017,81 ostensibly because it served no useful purpose, but presumably also because of the very  obvious bias. This mitigation was possible because CAS is a transparent software, that was developed  in-house by the Dutch police. The types of indicators used to predict crime were made openly  available, and information about the method by which the software made predictions could easily be  accessed and understood.82 
This, however, is not the case for all AI systems, because AI systems are often developed by for-profit companies with little to no meaningful input from the public. As such, details of how they are  designed, and how they make decisions and assessments are, in many cases, closely guarded as trade  secrets that are protected by law.83 Often, AI systems are ‘black boxes’ because they are deliberately  kept that way. While it is accepted that strong, enforceable intellectual property laws are needed to  promote advancements in what is a very dynamic field of scientific research and innovation, it is not acceptable that these concerns trump the rights of individuals suspected or accused of crimes. In light  of this, it is concerning that the Commission’s White Paper focuses on, and strongly promotes, the  concept of a ‘partnership between the private and the public sector’ in relation to AI.84 Fair Trials  appreciates that effective public-private collaboration could help to fill in gaps in public sector  expertise and capacity for the development of AI systems, but given the transparency challenges, it is  essential thatsuch partnerships are accompanied by robust regulations and rules that ensure effective  and open scrutiny.  
However, even if AI systems are completely exposed to public scrutiny, and their source code85 and  input data, for example, are openly disclosed, there is still no guarantee that they will be sufficiently  transparent to enable adequate independent scrutiny. AI systems can be black boxes by nature of the  technology that makes their decision-making processes complicated beyond comprehension for most  (in some cases, too complicated even for computer scientists to understand).86 This is especially the  case where AI systems are based on machine-learning algorithms.  
One possible reason for the unintelligibility of AI systems is that they sometimes use machine-learning  algorithms that are simply too complex to be understood to a reasonable degree of precision.87 This  is especially the case where AI systems incorporate ‘Deep Neural Networks’ – a machine-learning  algorithmic architecture inspired by the structure and mechanics of human brains. Rather than relying  on a set of man-made instructions, these types of AI systems make decisions based on experience and  learning. Decision-making processes of this kind have been described to be ‘intuitive’, because they  do not follow a defined logical method, making it impossible to analyse the exact process by which a  particular decision is reached.88 It has also been suggested that some AI systems are uninterpretable  to humans because the machine-learning algorithms that support them are able to identify and rely  on geometric relationships that humans cannot visualise. Certain machine-learning algorithms are  able to make decisions by analysing many variables at once, and by finding correlations and geometric  patterns between them in ways that are beyond the capabilities of human brains.89  
Given these challenges, there is widespread recognition that states should require AI systems to not  only be ‘transparent’, but also explainable and intelligible.90 GDPR already recognises that individuals  should have the right to an explanation of how a decision was reached, if they have been subject to  an automated decision.91 In principle, this is an essential and very useful requirement, but it is also  one that seems difficult to implement in practice, given that both ‘explainability’ and intelligibility are  highly subjective concepts. Arguably, AI systems’ computing processes are inherently difficult to  explain and understand for most people, including for most criminal justice decision-makers, but this  surely should not be the sole basis for oversimplifying the technology, or for banning the use of AI  outright.  
Computer scientists have been theorising different ways of ensuring that decisions made through  complex algorithms can be explained and understood. An example is the ‘explainable AI’ movement  (‘xAI’) that aims to build AI systems that can show more discernible links between inputted data and  decisions. xAI systems measure how each input influences the final decision, so it is possible figure out  how much weight is given to each input.92 This seems to be an innovative response to the ‘black box’  challenge, establishing clearer, more helpful relationships between inputs and final decisions.  However, it appears to fall short of explaining what happens between data being inputted into the  system and the final decision, and it does not enable users to impute any logic to the decision-making  process.93 
As explained above, there are various reasons why AI systems need to be transparent and intelligible,  but the effective of exercise of the rights of the defence must be recognised as a crucial test for  determining whether an AI system is sufficiently explainable and intelligible. AI systems have to be  designed in a way that allows criminal defendants to understand and contest the decision made  against them. Partnership for AI has suggested that a central factor that determines the contestability  of AI systems is the possibility of carrying out an audit trail of the AI decision.94 In particular, it has to  be possible for an auditor to follow and reproduce the process and come to the same conclusion  reached by the AI system at the end.  
Furthermore, as explained in further detail below, criminal justice procedures should require the full  disclosure of all aspects of AI systems that are necessary for suspects and accused persons to contest  their findings, and this disclosure should be in a form which is understandable to a layperson, without  the need for technical or expert assistance. 
AI systems need to be transparent and explainable, so they can be understood and scrutinised by  their primary users, suspects and accused persons, as well as the general public. Commercial or  proprietary interests, or technical concerns, should never be a barrier to transparency. AI systems  must be designed in a way that allows criminal defendants to understand and contest the decision  made against them. It should be possible to carry out an independent audit, and processes should  be reproducible.  


Part 2: Safeguards for the use of AI Systems in Criminal Proceedings 
AI systems have to be built in accordance with human rights principles, and to give effect to human  rights in practice, but it is unlikely that their design alone will guarantee that they are used in ways  that comply with human rights. Regulatory frameworks for the design and deployment of AI systems  have to be accompanied by appropriate legal safeguards that ensure they are used responsibly and  lawfully. There are two primary questions that need to be addressed: 
1) how procedural rules ensure that decision-makers do not over-rely on AI systems; and 2) how decisions and assessments made by AI systems can be analysed independently and  challenged. 
Combatting ‘Automation Bias’ and Reinforcing Meaningful Human Input 
One of the main challenges of automated, or semi-automated decision-making systems is that of  ‘automation bias’ – the tendency to over-rely on automation in ways that can cause errors in decision making. Automation bias occurs primarily due to the perception that automated decision-making  processes are generally trustworthy and reliable. Automated cues have been found to be particularly  salient to decision-makers, and research has shown that users of automated decision-making systems  have a tendency to place greater weight on automated assessments over other sources of advice.95 
The disproportionate influence of automated systems can undermine the quality of decision-making,  by discouraging its users from consulting a wider range of factors that could inform more accurate  decisions.  
Most AI systems currently being used to assist criminal justice decision-making do not completely  replace human decision-making. They are instead designed and deployed to be used as decision aids,  whose outputs are factored into consideration for the purposes of human decision-making. The  phenomenon of automation bias however, raises questions about whether AI systems are being used  in reality in accordance with their intended purpose as decision aids, and not as de facto replacements  for human decision-making processes.  
There is strong evidentiary basis for automation bias amongst pilots who, like judges and other  decision-makers in criminal justice proceedings, have typically been through a high level of training to  make appropriate decisions in highly complex settings.96 However, limited research into automation  bias amongst judges suggests that AI systems might have a more complex impact on judges’  behaviour. For example, a study conducted in 2019 in Kentucky seems to suggest that the degree to  which judges rely on predictive tools for pre-trial detention decision-making could be influenced by  the ethnicity of the defendant.97 The research indicates that judges had a greater tendency to rely on  algorithmic risk assessments where the defendant was white, whereas in cases where the defendant  was black, judges were more likely to overrule the risk-assessment in favour of detaining them. This  study appears to show that AI systems can influence judges’ behaviour in unpredictable ways,  especially where there are interactions or conflicts between automation and human biases, and that  AI systems might be an ineffective tool for challenging human prejudices. It is crucial that rules governing the use of AI systems in criminal proceedings actively try to counter  automation bias, and to encourage decision-makers to make independent determinations. A simple  requirement to have a human decision-maker ‘in the loop’ or to have a human decision-maker review  or check the automated decision is insufficient, because this risks overestimating the capacity or  willingness of human decision-makers to question and overrule automated decisions. A mere requirement to have an automated decision reviewed by a human, on its own, could reduce the  human review into a rubber-stamping exercise which, in practice, is no oversight at all.  
In recognition of this challenge, the European Data Protection Board has recommended that in order  for decisions to be regarded as not ‘based solely’ on automated processing for the purposes of Article  22 GDPR, there has to be ‘meaningful’ human oversight, rather than just a token gesture.98 What  qualifies as ‘meaningful’ intervention is open to interpretation, and it is likely to differ depending on  the circumstances and the type of decision being made. In the context of criminal justice procedures,  where decisions often have particularly severe and far-reaching implications for individuals’ rights,  safeguards for ensuring meaningful human intervention have to be especially robust. 
Procedural safeguards that ensure ‘meaningful’ human oversight 
Rules governing the use of AI systems in criminal justice proceedings have to counter automation  bias by encouraging human decision-makers to treat their processes with scepticism, and to force  them to challenge and scrutinise the outcomes of algorithmic assessments.  
Procedural safeguards that can be put in place to tackle automation bias include: 
a) making it a legal requirement for decision-makers to be adequately alerted and informed  about the risks associated with AI systems; 
b) making AI systems’ assessments intelligible to decision-makers; 
c) requiring decision-makers to provide full, individualised reasoning for all decisions  influenced by an AI system; and 
d) making it easier for decision-makers to overrule AI assessments that produce unfavourable  outcomes for defendants.  
One way of ensuring that automated assessments and decisions do not have undue influence on  judicial decisions might be to ensure that decision-makers are sufficiently informed and alerted about  the risks of relying on AI systems. This seems to be the approach taken by the Wisconsin Supreme  Court in the United States in the case of Loomis,99 in which the Court considered whether or not the  use of the COMPAS risk assessment tool for sentencing purposes violated due process rights. The  judgment in Loomis recognises the importance of procedural safeguards as a way of safeguarding  fairness of decisions, by requiring the use of ‘written advisements’ to alert decision-makers about the  potential risks of AI risk assessments. Specifically, the court mandated that these advisements had to  include warnings that: a) the process by which the COMPAS produces risk scores were not disclosed  due to its ‘proprietary nature’; b) the accuracy of risk scores are undermined by the fact that COMPAS  relied on group data; c) the risk-assessment tool had never been tested locally for accuracy; d)  ‘questions’ have been raised about the discriminatory effect of COMPAS risk-assessments; and e)  COMPAS was developed to inform post-sentencing decisions, but not sentencing decisions  themselves. These warnings are clearly very specific to COMPAS and the context in which it is used in Wisconsin.  If similar safeguards were adopted in different contexts and with regard to different AI systems,  advisements will no doubt need to be adapted. The warnings used in Loomis have, however, been  criticised because they do not give enough information to decision-makers to enable them to  appreciate the degree to which these risk-assessments should be discounted.100 In particular, the  advisements are silent on the strength of the criticisms against COMPAS, and they say nothing about  the basis on which questions about their discriminatory effect have been raised.101 These warnings  also give no indication about likely margin of error of the assessment, so although judges are informed  that some assessments might be inaccurate, they are not in a position to appreciate how serious or  frequent these errors might be. 
‘Advisements’, or warnings that encourage decision-makers to be sceptical of AI systems cannot be  considered as effective safeguards, unless they contain sufficiently helpful information for decision makers. However, even if judges are given stronger warnings than those in the Loomis advisements,  it is still doubtful whether they alone will adequately mitigate automation bias. One reason for this is  that many criminal justice decisions (such as pre-trial detention decisions) are, in practice, made very  routinely by judges. Although written advisements might initially help judges think more critically  about automated risk assessments, over time, these advisements could become repetitive and  routine, and lose much of the intended meaning and effect.102 
An effective safeguard that could work in conjunction with mandatory warnings could be for decision makers to be given a better insight into how AI systems produce a particular assessment or calculation.  As mentioned above, the lack of information about how assessments are made by AI systems makes  it harder for criminal defendants to scrutinise and challenge them. Surely, this has to be true also for  decision-makers. It is much harder, if not impossible, to analyse and criticise decisions if there is no  reasoning behind them. While AI systems do not rely on ‘reasoning’ per se, information given to  decisions about how a specific assessment was made, including what factors were relevant, and how  much weight was given to each factor could give decision-makers more confidence to decide whether  to agree or disagree with an AI-generated decision.  
Decisions or assessments made by AI systems cannot be the sole basis of criminal justice decisions – they should be no more than a factor that can influence human-decision making. As such, decision makers should be required to show that decisions were influenced by a broader range of factors other  than the AI system, by way of fully reasoned, case-specific, written decisions. Research has shown that  the lack of case-specific reasoning in pre-trial detention decisions is already a serious challenge in  many EU Member States,103 and AI systems risk worsening the standardisation of such decision making processes. Where AI systems are used to inform pre-trial detention decisions, or any other  criminal justice decision that has a significant impact on the rights of the defendant, reasoned  decisions must be specific to the defendant’s case, and in particular, they must reveal what which  factors influenced the decision, and to what degree. In particular, decisions have to make it clear how  much weight was given to assessments by AI systems. 
It is also crucial that decision-makers are able to override decisions made by AI systems, and that they  are confident about doing so where the tool produces assessments or recommendations that are  unfavourable to the defendant (e.g. where the AI system advises against releasing the defendant). It  has been reported that members of the police force in Avon and Somerset Police in the United  Kingdom are expected to record incidences where they have disagreed with assessments made by a  predictive policing tool, and to explain their reasons for the disagreement.104 This is likely to act as a  strong disincentive for overriding decisions made by the AI system, and as such, it actively facilitates  automation bias. Furthermore, it seems to interfere with the presumption of innocence by making it  difficult for decision-makers to override AI systems to make decisions that favour the defendant. If an  AI system recommends the arrest or the detention of an individual, decision-makers should feel that  they have a genuine choice of overruling the AI system, and not be pressured into compliance.  Criminal justice decision-making processes should, as a general rule, be skewed in favour of the  defence to give effect to the presumption of innocence, and rules governing the use of AI systems  should favour favourable outcomes for defendants.  
On the other hand, in cases where a decision-maker acts against the advice of an AI system that  recommends a favourable outcome for the defendant, there should be a requirement for reasons to  be given for their decision. This is to prevent unfavourable outcomes for defendants that are  motivated by improper reasons, and to mitigate the risk of unconscious bias. 
Challenging AI in criminal proceedings 
AI systems need to be contestable by criminal defendants. This is so that they can not only challenge  the outcomes of the AI systems’ calculations and analyses, but also scrutinise the legality of their use.  In other words, being able to challenge AI systems in criminal proceedings is not only a procedural  fairness requirement for defendants, it is also a means by which legal standards governing AI systems  and their use can be enforced.  
One of the major issues preventing the sufficient contestability of AI systems in criminal proceedings  is the lack of notification. If an individual is not notified that they have been subject to an automated  decision by an AI system, they will not have the ability to challenge that decision, or the information  that the decision was based on. 
For example, in the United Kingdom, the Data Protection Act 2018 sets out the applicability of the  GDPR and sets out the UK’s interpretations of the GDPR’s requirements and safeguards. However, section 14 of the Data Protection Act significantly dilutes the requirements of Article 22 of the GDPR,  permitting purely automated decisions which have legal or similar significant effects on a data subject,  without their consent, as long as the data subject is subsequently notified that a purely automated  decision has been taken about them, after the decision has been made. It is only then that the data  subject has the opportunity to request a new decision.  
However, it has been reported that individuals subject to decisions by the HART system in the UK are  not notified at all that they have been subject to such an automated decision, even after it has been  made.105 This is likely because under the Data Protection Act 2018, automated decisions which have  legal or similar significant effects on a subject are not necessarily classified as ‘purely automated’ if a  human has administrative input. In order to meet this requirement, the human input can be as minimal as checking a box to accept the automated-decision, even if it has a significant impact on an  individual, such as holding them in custody. This minimal requirement for human requirement means  that, in practice, decisions made with negligible to no meaningful human input can be classified as not  “purely automated” and there is no legal requirement to notify and ability to request a new decision.  In this way, systems such as HART continue to be used, with people subject to their decisions  completely uninformed. 
While the GDPR already requires the notification of individuals affected by automated decisions, the  UK’s experience with HART highlights the need for stricter rules to not only ensure meaningful human  input (as mentioned above), but to also strengthen the individual’s right to be notified.  
There must be a requirement for individuals to be notified, not just for “purely automated” decisions,  but whenever there has been an automated decision-making system involved, assistive or otherwise,  that has or may have impacted a criminal justice decision. This notification should include clear and  comprehensible information about the decision that has been taken, how that decision was reached,  including details of the information or data involved in reaching that decision, what the result or  outcomes of the decision are, and what effects, legal or otherwise they have, and information on how  to challenge that decision. 
As discussed in the previous section, a further major barrier to the contestability of AI systems is a  technical one. The ‘black box’ nature of certain AI systems can be largely attributed to their design, so  it is important that there are rules governing the interpretability of these systems so that when they  are in use, their processes can be understood at all. However, there are also legal barriers to the full  disclosure of AI systems, which are often put in place to protect commercial interests. Procedural  safeguards play a particularly important and effective role in addressing these types of opacity  challenges. 
Transparency is a fundamental aspect of an adversarial process that underpins the right to a fair trial,  and human rights standards require that as a general rule defendants should be given unrestricted  access to their case-file,106 and to be given the opportunity to comment on the evidence used against  them.107 These standards are further reinforced by Directive 2012/13/EU,108 which requires Member  States to grant access to all material evidence in possession of the competent authorities to the  defence to safeguard the fairness of the proceedings and to enable defendants to prepare their  defence.109 The procedural requirement of an adversarial process is not one that is limited to  substantive criminal proceedings – it also applies in the context of pre-trial decision-making processes,  especially for decisions on the deprivation of liberty.110 While EU law and international human rights  law also recognise that there might be certain justifications for non-disclosure of materials used  against the defendant in criminal proceedings, these are narrow restrictions, and commercial interests  are not regarded as a valid justification for non-disclosure.111 Furthermore, EU law does not explicitly  recognise any derogations from the right of access to materials that are essential to challenging the lawfulness of an arrest or detention.112 In order for Member States to comply with these standards,  any exceptions to the disclosure of information regarding AI systems have to be applied very narrowly.  
Barriers to scrutiny and accountability of AI systems are not only legal, but also technical. As explained  in previous sections, many AI systems suffer from interpretability issues because of their design and  by the nature of the machine-learning technology upon which they rely. In the absence of specific  expertise on AI, it is difficult to imagine how, in practice, defendants and their lawyers will be able to  challenge AI systems.  
One possible solution to this challenge, as explained below, is training for defence lawyers – but it is  unreasonable to expect lawyers to develop expertise that would enable them to analyse and scrutinise  AI systems at a technical level. A further solution could be that defence lawyers have access to the  relevant expertise from suitably qualified professionals. 
However, in reality, not all criminal suspects and accused persons are able to access the legal and  other technical assistance needed to understand and challenge technically complex AI systems, for  financial or other practical reasons. It would also be unreasonable and unrealistic to require all  suspects and accused persons to engage technical expertise just to be able to understand how an AI  system makes a decision, especially where AI systems are used routinely or mandatorily to make or assist criminal justice decisions. 
It might seem unreasonable to expect all highly technical evidence to be challengeable by lay  defendants without the help of a suitable expert. However, AI systems are not necessarily used in  criminal proceedings as ‘evidence’, and in practice they could be an integral part of a decision-making  process, or even a replacement for it. As such, it is essential that the ‘reasoning’ of AI systems are  made known to suspects and accused persons, similarly to how judicial decisions must contain  “sufficient reasoning and address specific features of a given case”, especially where they concern the  deprivation of liberty.113 Decision-making processes of AI systems and the way in which it has  produced an outcome in a particular case should thus be disclosed to suspects and accused persons,  in a form that is intelligible to a layperson. Individuals should not need to rely on experts to simply  understand how a decision affecting them was made. While there will inevitably be scenarios where  defendants would need expertise to challenge an AI-assisted decision, but these cases should be the  exception, rather than the norm, for whenever an AI system is used.  
Criminal justice procedures should require the notification to suspects and accused persons where  an AI system has been used which has or may have impacted a decision made about that individual.  Procedures should enable the full disclosure of all aspects of AI systems that are necessary for  suspects and accused persons to contest their findings. Disclosure should be in a form which is  comprehensible to a layperson, without the need for technical or expert assistance, and suspects  and accused persons should also be given effective access to technical experts who can help to  analyse and challenge otherwise incomprehensible aspects of AI systems. 
Training 
AI systems use technology not well understood by many people. Without proper training, outputs of  AI systems might not be easy to interpret, and it might be difficult to appreciate which factors  undermine the reliability of AI systems, so that appropriate weight can be attached to their findings.  As mentioned above, decision-makers can be warned about the weaknesses of AI systems as part of their decision-making process, but the effectiveness of this safeguard can be questioned, because it is  unlikely to provide decision-makers with all the information they need, and there is no guarantee that  the warnings will be taken seriously in all cases.  
Training is not just needed for the primary users of AI systems, such as judges and police officers who  use them to inform their own decisions. The training must also be available criminal defence lawyers,  so that they are in a better position to challenge AI systems, where necessary. If AI systems are used  routinely to aid criminal justice decisions or even made mandatory (as is the case in certain states in  the United States), there would be strong justification for governing bodies to make training on AI  mandatory for criminal justice practitioners.

Part 3: Governance and Monitoring 
Criminal justice processes are an important enforcement mechanism for ensuring that AI systems are  designed and used lawfully, but they cannot be the sole, or even the primary means of implementing  legal and ethical standards. Of equal, if not greater importance is a framework that ensures that policy  decisions on the design and deployment of AI systems are made in systematised way, and that  unlawful or harmful AI systems never enter into public service. Member States that deploy AI systems  for criminal justice purposes should have regulatory mechanisms that are fit for purpose. At a  minimum, these should include frameworks for: a) pre-deployment impact assessments; b) post deployment monitoring and evaluations; and c) collection of data needed for effective comparative  analysis.  
Pre-Deployment 
Both the GDPR and LED recognise the need for AI systems to be analysed before they are deployed,  so that they comply with existing regulatory and human rights standards. Under Article 35 GDPR,  Member States are required to carry out a ‘Data Protection Impact Assessment’ (‘DPIA’) for data  processing systems that carry out ‘a systematic and extensive evaluation of personal aspects relating  to natural persons which is based on automated processing, including profiling and on which decision  are based that produce legal effects concerning the natural person or similarly significantly affect the  natural person’. The corresponding provision in the LED is Article 27, which similarly calls for DPIAs to  be carried out where processing of data is likely to result in a ‘high risk to the rights and freedoms of  natural persons’. DPIAs under both laws have to carry out inter alia an assessment of the possible  impact of the data processing system on the rights or individuals, and they need to mention what  measures will be in place to ensure that their rights are properly protected.  
DPIAs help to address a serious accountability challenge, but EU laws do not provide sufficiently  helpful standards on how they should be conducted. Article 27 LED does not lay down minimum  requirements for how DPIAs should be carried out. On the other hand, there are aspects of Article 35  GDPR which, if used to guide how DPIAs should be conducted for AI systems used in criminal justice,  would raise concerns. The foremost challenge is the level of transparency mandated by the GDPR.  DPIAs are envisaged largely as internal processes led by the data controller, who may seek the opinions  of data subjects (such as members of the public or their representatives), where it is ‘appropriate’ to  do so. The GDPR also explicitly recognises that the requirement to seek the views of data subject is  ‘without prejudice to the protection of commercial interests’.114 
As outlined above, transparency is a key aspect of a fair criminal justice system and, as a general rule,  all criminal justice decision-making processes need to be open to public scrutiny. There is no reason  why AI systems should be exempt from this requirement and, given that administration of criminal  justice is a matter of strong public interest, the public should have the right to voice their opinions and  raise objections whenever AI systems impact criminal justice processes. Also, given the highly  technical nature of AI systems, and their (as yet) poorly understood impact on society, impact  assessments must have multi-disciplinary expert engagement. 115 In particular, DPIAs should always  involve independent experts (computer scientists, in particular) who can audit, analyse, and if  possible, ‘explain’ AI systems, so that they can help legal, policy and social science experts to  determine the likely implications for the individuals’ rights. 

For public and expert consultations to be meaningful and effective, sufficient information should be  made available to interested parties so that the AI system can be thoroughly understood and  researched. Partnership on AI has recommended that for criminal justice risk-assessment tools,  training datasets,116 architectures and algorithms of AI systems should be made available to ensure  meaningful scrutiny.117 Commercial interests should not be regarded as a legitimate ground for  limiting the disclosure of this information.  
Secondly, Article 35 GDPR allows data controllers to carry out a single DPIA ‘for a set of similar  processing operations that present similar high risks’. There is a danger that this provision could be  interpreted too broadly if Member States are given free rein to determine what two systems can be  regarded as sufficiently ‘similar’. There are risks in assuming that an AI system well-suited for use in a  particular context or within a particular geographic area will be equally useful in another. AI systems  built using data from one jurisdiction might not be able to reflect differences in, for example, law  enforcement culture and patterns of behaviour, laws and policies, and socio-demographic  characteristics of another jurisdiction.118 Sometimes, these differences can be seen in the same  country or even within the same region. For example, a study of ‘PRECOBS’ a predictive policing tool  used in Baden-Wurttemberg in Germany, found significant differences in predictive utility between  rural and urban areas.119 
Finally, DPIAs seem to require data controllers to theorise the possible impact of AI systems, but there  is no strict requirement for AI systems to be subject to testing or auditing before, or immediately after  deployment. This overlooks the fact that flaws in AI systems, including unintentional biases, are not  always easily detectable, and that they might only surface once the system is put into operation. As  discussed earlier, the causes of biases in AI systems can be difficult to identify, and it is difficult to  appreciate how, short of thorough testing, the true impact of AI decisions can be known.  
In New York, the AI Now Institute has proposed an alternative model for impact assessments, known  as ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments’ (‘AIAs’).120 The AIA framework sets out in detail how public  authorities should conduct impact assessments of AI systems, and it can be contrasted with the  provisions of the GDPR in that AIAs place much greater emphasis on the need for community  engagement and consultations with external experts. This framework could serve as a useful guide for  Member States seeking to establish pre-deployment procedures for approving AI systems.  
AI systems should not be deployed unless they have undergone an independent public impact  assessment with the involvement of appropriate experts, that is specific both to the purpose for  which the AI system is deployed, and the locality where it is deployed. AI systems must be tested  for impact pre-deployment, and systems should be precluded from deployment until they have  undergone this testing and achieved minimum standards, such as non-discrimination. 
Post-Deployment 
Impact assessments of AI systems should not be regarded as ‘one-off’ processes. They have to be  followed up with ongoing post-deployment monitoring and evaluation, so that the longer-term impact of AI systems can be understood, and shortcomings and biases that affect the rights of  individuals can be identified and fixed.  
The ability of AI systems to deliver fair and just outcomes, and to meet policy objectives can be difficult  to predict from the outset. Although AI systems can be validated and tested prior to deployment to  check if they are likely to produce desired outcomes, their impact in the real world might be different.  Furthermore, even if the likely outputs of AI systems can be predicted, it is much harder to estimate  the likely impact they will have on human decision-making.121 
Further reviews of AI systems are also necessary because criminal justice systems and the societies in  which they operate change over time. A study in the United States, for example, theorises that many  pre-trial risk assessment tools might be making predictions based on historic data that is no longer fit  for purpose. It has been suggested that because data used to train risk assessment algorithms pre 
date bail reforms in many US jurisdictions, the impact of recent measures introduced to reduce the  risk of failure-to-appear, such as transportation assistance and text message alerts are not taken into  consideration – potentially leading to over-incarceration.122 Socio-demographic changes might also  require AI systems to be altered so that they continue to be fit for purpose. If, for example, an area  experiences high levels of net migration which results in rapid changes to policing patterns and judicial  behaviour, AI systems might need to be reviewed to make sure they are not unintentionally worsening  racial discrimination.  
Data Collection 
It is difficult to imagine how the impact of AI systems can be assessed, if there is inadequate data to  support effective monitoring. The deficiency of criminal justice data across the EU has been subject to  criticism. In particular, Fair Trials has found that most EU Member States do not systemically collect  statistics on the duration of pre-trial detention, outcomes of criminal cases of pre-trial detainees, and  the likelihood of a suspect or accused person being released by the court.123 The data needed for  effective monitoring and evaluation depends on the function of the AI system and its intended  objectives, but the lack of criminal justice data more generally questions whether Member States  currently have adequate legal and policy foundations for introducing AI systems responsibly into  criminal justice processes. Data needed for monitoring and evaluation purposes will, of course, need  to have been collected from well before the introduction of the AI system, so that a proper pre- and  post- analysis comparison can be made.  
Of particular concern is that in most EU Member States, race or ethnic data on criminal justice is not  available, either because there is no systemised process for collecting it, or because local laws ban this  practice altogether.124 This is a serious challenge because the most predominant criticism against the  use of AI systems in the United States and elsewhere is that it worsens racial and ethnic bias in criminal  justice decisions. Even without official statistics, there is strong evidence in many EU Member States  that certain ethnic minorities, and in particular, Roma and people of colour are unfairly  overrepresented in criminal justice systems.125 It is worrying that AI systems might worsen this  discrimination, but that there will be no way of detecting this trend, because of the lack of data.  

Furthermore, the absence of racial and ethnic data could also prevent pre-emptive measures to  combat racial bias. It is doubtful that developers will be able to design systems free from racial bias, if  they have no data against which to measure their performance.  
On data collection, Fair Trials believe that EU and its Member States will need to make a strict choice.  Either they should ensure that racially disaggregated criminal justice data is collected, or AI systems  should be banned where they make individualised assessments for criminal justice purposes. 
Effective monitoring of AI systems is not possible unless there is sufficient data that makes it  possible to discern their real impact. In particular, Member States need to collect data that allow  them to identify discriminatory impacts of AI systems, including discrimination on the basis of race  and ethnicity.
