A. INTRODUCTION
1. Mr Richard Lloyd - with financial backing from Therium Litigation Funding IC, a
commercial litigation funder - has issued a claim against Google LLC, alleging breach of
its duties as a data controller under section 4(4) of the Data Protection Act 1998 (“the
DPA 1998”). The claim alleges that, for several months in late 2011 and early 2012,
Google secretly tracked the internet activity of millions of Apple iPhone users and used
the data collected in this way for commercial purposes without the users’ knowledge
or consent.
2. The factual allegation is not new. In August 2012, Google agreed to pay a civil
penalty of US$22.5m to settle charges brought by the United States Federal Trade
Commission based upon the allegation. In November 2013, Google agreed to pay
US$17m to settle consumer-based actions brought against it in the United States. In
England and Wales, three individuals sued Google in June 2013 making the same
allegation and claiming compensation under the DPA 1998 and at common law for
misuse of private information: see Vidal-Hall v Google Inc (Information Comr
intervening) [2015] EWCA Civ 311; [2016] QB 1003. Following a dispute over
jurisdiction, their claims were settled before Google had served a defence. What is
new about the present action is that Mr Lloyd is not just claiming damages in his own
right, as the three claimants did in Vidal-Hall. He claims to represent everyone resident
in England and Wales who owned an Apple iPhone at the relevant time and whose
data were obtained by Google without their consent, and to be entitled to recover
damages on behalf of all these people. It is estimated that they number more than 4m.
3. Class actions, in which a single person is permitted to bring a claim and obtain
redress on behalf of a class of people who have been affected in a similar way by
alleged wrongdoing, have long been possible in the United States and, more recently,
in Canada and Australia. Whether legislation to establish a class action regime should
be enacted in the UK has been much discussed. In 2009, the Government rejected a
recommendation from the Civil Justice Council to introduce a generic class action
regime applicable to all types of claim, preferring a “sector based approach”. This was
for two reasons:
“Firstly, there are potential structural differences between
the sectors which will require different consideration. …
Secondly, it will be necessary to undertake a full assessment
Page 3
of the likely economic and other impacts before
implementing any reform.”
See the Government’s Response to the Civil Justice Council’s Report: “Improving
Access to Justice through Collective Actions” (2008), paras 12-13.
4. Since then, the only sector for which such a regime has so far been enacted is
that of competition law. Parliament has not legislated to establish a class action regime
in the field of data protection.
5. Mr Lloyd has sought to overcome this difficulty by what the Court of Appeal in
this case described as “an unusual and innovative use of the representative procedure”
in rule 19.6 of the Civil Procedure Rules: see [2019] EWCA Civ 1599; [2020] QB 747,
para 7. This is a procedure of very long standing in England and Wales whereby a claim
can be brought by (or against) one or more persons as representatives of others who
have “the same interest” in the claim. Mr Lloyd accepts that he could not use this
procedure to claim compensation on behalf of other iPhone users if the compensation
recoverable by each user would have to be individually assessed. But he contends that
such individual assessment is unnecessary. He argues that, as a matter of law,
compensation can be awarded under the DPA 1998 for “loss of control” of personal
data without the need to prove that the claimant suffered any financial loss or mental
distress as a result of the breach. Mr Lloyd further argues that a “uniform sum” of
damages can properly be awarded in relation to each person whose data protection
rights have been infringed without the need to investigate any circumstances
particular to their individual case. The amount of damages recoverable per person
would be a matter for argument, but a figure of £750 was advanced in a letter of claim.
Multiplied by the number of people whom Mr Lloyd claims to represent, this would
produce an award of damages of the order of £3 billion.
6. Because Google is a Delaware corporation, the claimant needs the court’s
permission to serve the claim form on Google outside the jurisdiction. The application
for permission has been contested by Google on the grounds that the claim has no real
prospect of success as: (1) damages cannot be awarded under the DPA 1998 for “loss
of control” of data without proof that it caused financial damage or distress; and (2)
the claim in any event is not suitable to proceed as a representative action. In the High
Court Warby J decided both issues in Google’s favour and therefore refused permission
to serve the proceedings on Google: see [2018] EWHC 2599 (QB); [2019] 1 WLR 1265.
The Court of Appeal reversed that decision, for reasons given in a judgment of the
Chancellor, Sir Geoffrey Vos, with which Davis LJ and Dame Victoria Sharp agreed:
[2019] EWCA Civ 1599; [2020] QB 747.
Page 4
7. On this further appeal, because of the potential ramifications of the issues
raised, as well as hearing the claimant and Google, the court has received written and
oral submissions from the Information Commissioner and written submissions from
five further interested parties.
8. In this judgment I will first summarise the facts alleged and the relevant legal
framework for data protection before considering the different methods currently
available in English procedural law for claiming collective redress and, in particular, the
representative procedure which the claimant is seeking to use. Whether that
procedure is capable of being used in this case critically depends, as the claimant
accepts, on whether compensation for the alleged breaches of data protection law
would need to be individually assessed. I will then consider the claimant’s arguments
that individual assessment is unnecessary. For the reasons given in detail below, those
arguments cannot in my view withstand scrutiny. In order to recover compensation
under the DPA 1998 for any given individual, it would be necessary to show both that
Google made some unlawful use of personal data relating to that individual and that
the individual suffered some damage as a result. The claimant’s attempt to recover
compensation under the Act without proving either matter in any individual case is
therefore doomed to fail.
B. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
9. The relevant events took place between 9 August 2011 and 15 February 2012
and involved the alleged use by Google of what has been called the “Safari
workaround” to bypass privacy settings on Apple iPhones.
10. Safari is an internet browser developed by Apple and installed on its iPhones. At
the relevant time, unlike most other internet browsers, all relevant versions of Safari
were set by default to block third party cookies. A “cookie” is a small block of data that
is placed on a device when the user visits a website. A “third party cookie” is a cookie
placed on the device not by the website visited by the user but by a third party whose
content is included on that website. Third party cookies are often used to gather
information about internet use, and in particular web pages visited over time, to
enable the delivery to the user of advertisements tailored to interests inferred from
the user’s browsing history.
11. Google had a cookie known as the “DoubleClick Ad cookie” which could operate
as a third party cookie. It would be placed on a device if the user visited a website that
included DoubleClick Ad content. The DoubleClick Ad cookie enabled Google to
identify visits by the device to any website displaying an advertisement from its vast
Page 5
advertising network and to collect considerable amounts of information. It could tell
the date and time of any visit to a given website, how long the user spent there, which
pages were visited for how long, and what advertisements were viewed for how long.
In some cases, by means of the IP address of the browser, the user’s approximate
geographical location could be identified.
12. Although the default settings for Safari blocked all third party cookies, a blanket
application of these settings would have prevented the use of certain popular web
functions; so Apple devised some exceptions to them. These exceptions were in place
until March 2012, when the system was changed. But in the meantime the exceptions
made it possible for Google to devise and implement the Safari workaround. Its effect
was to place the DoubleClick Ad cookie on an Apple device, without the user’s
knowledge or consent, immediately, whenever the user visited a website that
contained DoubleClick Ad content.
13. It is alleged that, in this way, Google was able to collect or infer information
relating not only to users’ internet surfing habits and location, but also about such
diverse factors as their interests and pastimes, race or ethnicity, social class, political or
religious beliefs or affiliations, health, sexual interests, age, gender and financial
situation.
14. Further, it is said that Google aggregated browser generated information from
users displaying similar patterns, creating groups with labels such as “football lovers”,
or “current affairs enthusiasts”. Google’s DoubleClick service then offered these group
labels to subscribing advertisers to choose from when selecting the type of people at
whom they wanted to target their advertisements