1. Chapter One

1.1. Historical Background
English as a separate and distinct entity appeared in the great Germanic century,
but it was until the beginning of the seventh that the language defiantly emerged
from the confusion and turmoil of the conquest of Britain and began to take its
place among the modern tongues of Europe.
If we take a look to the history of the British Isles, we find that it has been
visited by many people from the European mainland and the visitors must have
liked what they have found, because often the visits turned into invasions or
attempted invasions
Before the dawn of recorded history, the British Isles had been visited, overrun,
and conquered by two separate groups of Celtic invaders, speaking tongues which
were the remote ancestors of present-day Gaelic and Welsh. (Pei,1953:12)
During the earlier part of the eleventh century, Edward, the son of Ethelred the
Unready and of the daughter of a Norman duke, was being brought up in
Normandy, and when he at last came to the throne in 1042 the influence of his
upbringing naturally remained, and his friends and supporters were both spiritual
and temporal French. This certainly prepared the way for the Norman Conquest.
(Jespersen, 1955:105) The Normans adopted a northern dialect of Old French
known as Anglo-Norman(Carpenter,2004:79-80), which they spoke with certain
characteristics and it was this dialect which was carried into English in the eleventh
century and which was developed there into a specific variety known as Anglo-
Norman.

1.2. English Language before the coming of the Normans
Before the Norman Conquest, the people of England spoke Old English or what
was called Anglo-Saxon. This language was Germanic in vocabulary, with few
borrowings. It had many declensions of substantives. There was one declension
which formed its genitive singular in –es and its nominative plural in –as; and
there were other declensions in which –a, -an, -e appear as endings for the genitive
singular m and –a, -an, -e,-u for the nominative plural. Out of all these the –es and
–as declension is the online that remains in general use.
If we take a look to the case-endings in Old English ; we find that –es was the
only one that meant anything other than a genitive singular and –as which only
meant a nominative or accusative plural. Thus hanan stands for the genitive,
dative, and accusative singular and the nominative and accusative plural of hana, a
cock. So it is a popular error to suppose that it was in the consequence of the
Norman Conquest that the –es and –as declension came to sup ride all the rest. In
fact, the change began in the Northern dialect.( Bradley, 1955:35)
It is estimated that in the field of vocabulary about 450 Latin words came into
Old English before the Norman Conquest. This is a surprisingly large total to those
who think of the Anglo-Saxon era as the period of pure Germanium in the
language. It is those words that would normally have entered English from 1066
on, and it is clear that even without the French cultural importation, present-day English would not be altogether a simon-pure Germanic tongue. Just before the
coming of the Normans, Old English was a deft blend of west Germanic and
Scandinavian, with the former still predominating and respectable amount of Latin-
Greek borrowings, about half of them of a religious nature.

2. Chapter two

?ً 2.1. what is the Norman Conquest..
The Norman Conquest is the invasion and conquering of the Normans to
England in 1066.It began when William of Normandy invaded England and seized
its throne.

.2. The Roots of the Norman Conquest. 2
When William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, descend of Rollo (leader of
Norsemen) and son of a tanner's daughter , conceived the ambitious plan of making
himself master of the great island beyond the sea, he did not minimize the
difficulty of invasion . He knew that Anglo-Saxons and Danes had been forged
into a united, and hardy race by the wise policies of Alfred and Cnut, and that the
armies of his opponent Harold were strong. Historians estimate that of the vast host
gathered by William for the invasion of England only one third of them were of
native Normans. These men were land hungry. It was their expectations that in
case of victory the lands of England would be wrested from their Anglo-Saxon
owners and given to them. They were not disappointed for William kept his
promises.
When the Norman host disembarked at Hastings, Anglo-Saxon England was
already carved up in advance a fact which Harold's men did not know. Being fresh
from a victory , they won against the king of Norway, supported by Harold's
brother. They may have thought that in case of defeat, their lot would be no worse
than had been their ancestor's in the Danelagh. The Normans would be absorbed,
Anglicized as to language and customs, and all would go on as before. In the final
analysis, they were perhaps right. However, centuries had to elapse before this
would come to pass.(Encyclopaedia Britanica,v.5:881-882)
The Norman victory was complete, so was the conquest. For five years
after the fateful day the Saxons thugs and earls were forcibly deprived of their
lands and privileges by the insolent invaders, continued to rebel and resist, while
William and his mercenaries raged through the land. After that the resistance died
away. The Saxon nobility robbed in everything in favor of William's followers; sank suddenly to the level of their own peasantry, while the ancient free men of
England, now undistinguished from the churls, turned into villains of the new
seigneurs. Saxon England was laid low .Norman England had replaced
it.(Campbell,1982:240)
Yet Saxon England was not quite dead. The new court, clergy and nobility knew
and spoke only French and Latin. However the subject population lived on and so
did its language; a language now scorned for literary purposes as the language of
an inferior race. (Pei, 1953:33)
From what has been mentioned above, it is noticed that the Normans were
looked at as an alien race; their occupation of the country attracted much more
notice and lasted longer than that of the Danes; they become the ruling class. They
represented a higher culture than that of the native and had a literature of their own
.
The Normans became the masters of England and they remained masters for a
sufficiently long time to leave impress on the language. The conquerors would
have been far less if they had not continued for centuries in actual contact with the
French of France. After the conquest, the immigrants formed the upper class of the
English society. The following classes of words show this fact:
Words relating to government
Crown, state, government, reign, realm, sovereign, authority, country,
minister, chancellor, authority, parliament, people, nation
.
Words related to feudalism:
Fief, feudal, vassal, liege
.
Words relating to steps in the scale of rank:
Prince, peer, duke, marquis, viscount, baron
.
Words related to military affairs:
War, peace, battle, arms, armour, buckler, mail, lance, officer, dart,
lieutenant, sergeant, solider, troops, vessel, navy, admiral, enemy,
danger, prison, siege, guard.
Words related to law:
124
Justice, just, judge, court, suit, sue, plaintiff, defendant, plea, plead,
cause, assize, fee, accuse, crime, traitor, damage, heritage, properly,
penalty, injury, privilege, tenure
.
Words related to church:
Religion, service, trinity, savior, virgin, angle, saint, abbey, cloister,
friar, clergy, parish, baptism, sacrifice, orison, alter, sermon, preach,
pray, prayer, feast
.
Words related to the pleasure of life:
Joy, pleasure, delight, ease, comfort
Some of the favorite pastimes were Chase, Cards and Dice, so we find many
French words related to them, such as:
Brace, couple, lease, falcon, quarry, warren, scent, track, partner, suit,
trump
Words related to dress:
apparel, dress, costume, garment
Words related to art:
art, beauty, colour, image, design, figure, ornament
The long list of words which is mentioned above indicates the fact that French
was the rich, powerful, and refined class in the English society. Therefore, it was
natural that the lower classes should soon begin to adopt such of the expressions of
the rich as they could catch the meaning .

3. Chapter Three

3. 1. The Linguistic Effects of the Norman Conquest on English language
The Norman Conquest of Britain has a number of linguistic effects on the
language spoken in England at that time. Some of the results of these influences
were the following:
1. Change in the conditions of dialects .The conquest placed all four Old English
dialects more or less on a level. As such, West Saxon lost its supremacy and the
center of culture and learning gradually shifted from Winchester to London. The
Old Northumbrian dialect became divided into Scottish and Northern, although
little is known of either of these divisions before the end of the 13th century. The
Old Mercian dialect was split into East and West Midland. West Saxon became
slightly diminished in area and was more appropriately named the South Western
dialect. The Kentish dialect was considerably extended and was called South
Eastern. All five Middle English dialects (Northern, West Midland, East Midland,
South Western, and South Eastern) went their own ways and developed their own
characteristics.
2. Change in the writing of English from the clear and easily readable in solar hand
of Irish origin to the dialect Carolingian script then in use on the continent.
3. Change in spelling for the sake of clarity. Old English y becomes u, Ý as yi, u as
ou (ow when final), u was often written o before and after m, n, u, w; and i was
sometimes written y before and after m and n, ew was changed to qu; hw to wh;
qu or quh to ch or tch; se to sh; cg to gg and ht to ght. Thus, for example,
mycel(much) appeared as muchel; fyr(fire) as fuir; hus (house) as hous;
hu(how) as how; snnu (son) as sone; him(him) as hym; cwen as queen; hwelet as
what; quat (quart)as quhrt ; dic as ditch; scip as ship, sccage (siege) as segge; and
miht as might.
The Northern infinitive was already one syllable, whereas the past participle –
en inflection of Old English was strictly kept. Old English mutated –ended in the
present participle had already become –inde in late Southern and it was this
inflection that blended with the –ing suffix of nouns of action that had already
become near-gerunds in such compound nouns as athswearing (oath swearing)and
writing feather (writing feather pen)
The Northern 2nd person singular singis was inherited unchanged from
common Germanic. The final t sound in Midland –est. and Southern –st was
excrescent comparable with the final t in modern (admist) and (amongst) from
older amides and amonges. The Northern 3rd person singular singis had quite
different origin. Like the singis of the plural, it resulted almost casually from an
inadvertent retraction of the tongue in enunciation from an interdental –th sound to
postendal –s. Today the form (singeth) services as a poetic archaism Shakespeare
used both –eth and –s endings (It "mercy"blesseth him that gives and him that
takes)
3.1.1. The Changes in Sounds and stress which took place after the Norman
Conquest
French words which adopted in English suffered a great change in sounds; they
have participated in all sound changes that have taken place in English since their
adaptation. Thus, words with the long [i] sound have had it diphthongized into [ai],
e.g. fine, price, lion. The long [u], written ou has become [au], e.g. Old French
espouse pronounced /spuize/ now pronounce /spauze/
The English is unable to imitate the French accentuation, that's why there are a
great many words now stressed on the final syllable. All English, it is said, had the
stress on the final syllable, and this habit was unconsciously extended to foreign
words on their first adoption into the language.
In the plural, Old French had a nominative without any ending and an
accusative in –s; and English popular instinct naturally associated the latter form
with the native plural ending in –es. In course of time those words which had for a
long time in English as in French formed their plural without any ending (e.g.
case) were made to conform to the general rule (sg.case.cases)
As to the verbs, the rule is that the stem of French present plural served as basis for
the English form; thus (je survis), nouns survivor vous survives, ils survivent
became survive ;( je resous), resolvous, etc.became resolve.
After what is stated, and in order to prove the great impact the Norman Conquest
had left on English, some of the French words with their synonyms in English
should be mentioned and they are arranged chronically.
A. The foreign words in the twelfth century can be classified as follows:ِa.
. Words denoting person or rank:1
Abbat "abbot"
canonic "canon"
capelein "chaplain"
cardinal "cardinal"
cuntesse "countess"
due "duke"
emperice "empress"
legat "legate"
Ex:
pehefde be Emperice in Alamanic & nu was cuntesse in Angou.
"Who had been Empress of Germany and now was Countess of Anjou"
Com an of Rome Henri was gehaten
"a legate called Henry came from Rome"
2. words denoting finance:
rent "rent"
tresor "treasure"
Ex:
Wrothe on pe circe & sette parto landes& rentes (worked on the church and endowed it with
lands and rents)
3. words denoting law and social relations:
acorden "reconcill"
justicse "justice"
pais "peace"
privilegie "privileges"
4. words denoting religion:
carite "charity"
miracle "miracle"
nativite "nativity"
procession"procession"
5. words denoting military:
werre "war"
werrien "to make war against"
6. words denoting nature:
128
Best "beast"
Contre "country"
Flum "river"
Marbre "marble"
Leun "lion"
Oil "oil"
Rose "rose"
7. Words denoting Household and other things:
Basi "basin"
Coup "cup"
Furneis "furnace"
Lamp "lamp"
8. words denoting physical action and appearance:
Cachen "catch"
Changen "change"
Chere "face, appearance"
Savour "savour"
9. Words denoting moral and Intellectual
Clergie "science"
Craviant "defeated"
Deol "sorrow"
Dout "doubt, fear"
Fausien "fail"
Gin "device"
Meistrie "mastery"
Reisun "reason"

B.some of the French words `during the period between 1200-1250:
1. words denoting person:
Ame "friend"
Baban "baby"
Baptist "Baptist"
Kunseiler "councilor"
Messager "messenger"
Nurice "nurse"
Prison "prisoner"
2. words denoting finance:
Cwile "quit"
Spense "expense"
3. words denoting buildings:
Celere "cellar"
Cite "city"
Knuent "convent"
Genere "granary"
Tur "tower"
4. words denoting law and social relations:
129
Baundun "power "
Crune "villiaains"
Juggen "judge"
Noces "marriage"
Trone "throne"
5. Words denoting religion
Calize "chalice"
Canoniicl "canonical"
Creoisem "to make the sign of the cross on"
Eresi "heresy"
Feste "festival"
Grace "grace"
Parais "Paradise"
6. Words denoting military
Baret "strife"
Calenge "challenge"
Gunfanenr "standard bearer"
Skirmen "fight"
Turnement "tournament"
7. words denoting nature:
Bame "balm"
Carbin "raven"
Cou de gilofre "clove"
Gingiuere "ginger"
Flur "flour"
Fluren "to flower"
Licur "liquor"
8. words denoting clothes:
Abit "habbit"
Atiffen "adorn"
Broche "brooch"
9. words denoting household:
Beaabelet "jewel"
Buste "box"
Cage "cage"
Chetel "chattels"
Crèche "crib"
Scorge "scourge"
Trufle "trifle"
10. words denoting physical action:
Aboutien "lean out"
Aspien "spy on"
Babelinde "chattering"
Buffeten "to buffet"
Disturben "disturb"
Recoilen "to drive back"
Rute "road"
11 . Words denoting moral and Intellectual:
Anui "worry"
Asprete "bitterness"
Comfort "comfort"
Kunscence "consciousness"
Contumace "contumacy"
Creaunt "craven"
Debonere "gentle"
Deinte "dignity"
Delit "delight"
Noblesce "nobility"
Mesure "moderation"
Largesse "generosity"
Pacience "pacience"
12. words denoting mental action:
Affaiten "dispose"
Akointed "acquainted"
Asaumple "example"
Attente "endeavour"
Bisamplen "to moralize"
Counsail "advice"
Defaut "fault"
Paien "please"
Preach "preach"
Preisen "to praise"
Scandle "scandal"
C. the French words during the period between 1250-1300
1. words denoting person:
Barun "barun"
Caynard "eascal"
Chanoun "clerk"
dam "sir"
Sergauuz "sergents"
2. words denoting law and social relations:
Eir "heir"
Eritage "heritage"
Per "peer"
Warrant "surely"
3. words denoting religion:
Aungel "angel"
Auter "alter"
Beneisun "benison"
131
Malison "malison"
Croize "cross"
Preie "pray"
4. words denoting military:
Baret "strife"
Gisarm "sword"
Skriming "large shield"
5. words denoting nature:
Bise "beast"
Runic "horse"
Laumprei "lamprey"
Flour "flower"
6. words denoting clothes:
Charbuole "carbuncle"
Ioupe "losse jacket"
7. Physical action:
Aise "ease"
Bout "throw"
Croune "crown"
Couere "recover"
Fyn "end"
Sane "safe"
8. words denoting food:
Broys "broth"
Clare "claret"
Pastees "sweet special wine"
Simenels "bread of fine flour"
Super "supper"
Ueneysun "venison"
9. Moral and Intellectual:
Anuicu "to worry"
Chiche "mean"
Conseyl "counsel"
Faith "faith"
Fey "felong"
Fol "foolish"
Gent "noble"
Atendre "tender"

3.2. Was the French influence restricted to one period?
The French influence was not restricted to one particular period, and it is
interesting to compare the forms of old loan-words with these of recent ones, in
which we can recognize traces of the changes the French language has undergone
since medieval times, where a ch in an originally French word is pronounced as in
change, chaunt, etc;(with the sound /ts/) where it is sounded as in champagne
(with simple /s/), we have a recent loan. The word chief is thus shown to belong to
the first period, while its doublet chef (=chef de cuisine) is much more modern. It
is curious that two pet-names should now be spelled in the same way, Charlie,
although they are distinct in pronunciation: the masculine is derived from the old
loan Charles and has, therefore, the, the sound [t ] .the feminine is from the recent
loan Charlotte with [ ], but they have all of them the same initial sound. Other
examples of the same French word appearing in more than one shape according to
its age in English are Saloon and salon, suit and suit, liquor and liqueur, rout and
route ;the diphthong in the former word is an English development of long[u],
quart, pronounced [kw t], and quart, pronounced [kw t] pronounced [k t],"a
sequence of four cards in pique," also quarte or carte in fencing. In early middle
English, words were borrowed from French containing the sound-group ch [t ](as
in English child),e.g. chief, chivalry, duchess, chase ,torch; and [d ](as in
gem),e.g. judge (both constants) just, journey, large; these consonant-groups
became respectively [ ]and[ ]in later French. Initially,however,[ ] is not found
in English without a proposed [d]; thus gentle, genteel, and jaunty represent three
larges of the borrowing from the same word.

3.3. How did common people manage to learn so many foreign words? And
how far did they assimilate them?
We expect to find many changes carried out in the French words after their
adoption in order to be easy to learn. In few cases the process of assimilation was
facilitate by the fact that a French word happened to resemble an old native one
and this is exemplified by the following:
The old native verb choose was supplemented with the noun choice, from French
choix. Old English hergian and Old French herir run together in Middle English
harry. Old English hege and French haie run together in hay "hedge,fence". The
word nevew (now spelled nephew)recalled Old English nefa, menege recalled
Old English meniegeo.
It is important to understand that the French words which were brought into
English represent two different dialects. The form of the French language which
obtained currency in England as the immediate consequence of the Norman
Conquest was the northern dialect-the speech of Normandy and Picardy. But with
the accession of the Angevine dynasty in the middle of the twelfth century the
dialect of Central France became the language of the court and of the fashionable
society.
The two dialects differed considerably in pronunciation: for instance, Northern
French had [k ]where Central French had [ch] and [ch] where Central French
had [s]. One consequence of the two –fold character of the French spoken in
England was that very often the same French word was adopted into English twice
over, in two different forms and with meanings more or less different. Thus we
have in modern English the words catch, warden, launch, wage, which came from
Norman French and alongside them there are chase ,guardian ,lance, gage, which
represent the same words as pronounced in French
The vocabulary of language after the conquest has been enriched by a multitude
of new derivation formed with the prefixes and suffixes that already existed in Old
English. The native machinery of derivation is no longer found sufficient for the
necessities of the language and has been largely supplemented by additions
obtained from other languages.
The adoption of foreign formative machinery has been rendered possible by the
fact that many Latin and French primitive words have been taken English along
with their derivations, formed with French or Latin suffixes. Therefore, when such
pairs of words as derive and derivation, esteem and estimation, laud and laudation
have found their way into the English vocabulary, it is natural that the suffixation
should be recognized by English speakers as an allowable means of making "nouns
of action" out of verbs.
This suffix supplied a real want because the only native means of forming
nouns of action was the suffix –ing, which was not quite definite enough in
meaning. Many French suffixes, such as –age, -al (as used in withdrawal,
upheaval, betrothal);-ment, and -able which have no thing corresponding to them
in English have been extensively used in the formation of English
derivations.(Henry,1955:86).

3.4. Did the influence of the Norman Conquest continue with the same degree
of effect as when it first began?
The influence of the Normans did not continue to be as strong as when it first
began. So it is naturally expected to find that the French as a second language
faced some retreat. The dawn of the 13th century found a trilingual England in
which French, Latin, and English live side by side ,each used for a different
purpose and with a different function.
The first was the literary and courtly tongue, the second was the church and
legal documents tongue and the third was the common intercourse tongue.
With the loss of Normandy by King John in 1204 (Pei, 1953:44), the English
language received the mighty Philip. It is conceivable that up to that time many of
England's new landed gentry thought of Normandy as "home" and of England as a
colonial possession in which they held their major domains. Now there was no
longer a "home "for them, except England. By the time of Edward I, all
Englishmen, whether of Saxon or Norman descent, were united ,and in 1295 the
king of England charged the French kings ,among other crimes, with wanting to
wipe out the English tongue.
So it is by the end of the 13th century that French had become almost a foreign
tongue in England, though it was gaining influence and prestige on the continent to
such an extent that German barons had it taught to their children. However, as far
as England was concerned, French was beginning to be taught out of manuals as a
cultural tongue and even the children of nobility learned it as a foreign language.
It was the Hindered Year's War with its bitter animosity against the French., and
the black Death of 1349-1350,which lead to rise in the importance of the laboring
classes and their tongue, that gave the death blow to French in England.
In 1349 English was reinstated in the schools; in 1362 Parliament forbade the use
of French in law courts, on the ground that "French is much unknown". By 1385
English had penetrated the scared precincts of the universities, with John Cornwall
and Richard Pencrich leading it at Oxford. By the time of Henry V (1413) English
was the official language at the court.