**Homelessness laws in Texas**

When is an individual considered homeless?
The United State Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) provides four broad
categories of homelessness:
 Individuals and families who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence,
which includes a subset for an individual who is exiting an institution where he or she
resided for 90 days or less and who resided in an emergency shelter or a place not
meant for human habitation immediately before entering that institution;
 Individuals and families who will imminently lose their primary nighttime residence;
 Unaccompanied youth and families with children and youth who are defined as
homeless under other federal statutes who do not otherwise qualify as homeless under
this definition; or
 Individuals and families who are fleeing, or are attempting to flee, domestic violence,
dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or other dangerous or life-threatening
conditions that relate to violence against the individual or a family member.
What negative effects can a large homeless population have on a city?
A large homeless population can be draining on a community. Homeless individuals that lack
access to proper medical care may choose an emergency room at a hospital for medical services
rather than a primary care medical office. This option is significantly more expensive and
typically the homeless individual is unable to pay the bill, so the cost is passed on to insurance
companies and the average customer in a community. Homeless individuals spend more time in
local jails than the housed population for petty offenses, which increases the costs to run the
facility. Additionally, a large homeless population can affect a city’s ability to attract tourists.
What is affordable housing?
Affordable housing is housing for which the occupant pays less than 30 percent of their income.
Housing that is considered to be “affordable” will differ between communities, depending on the
median family income of the area.
What is Section 8 housing?
“Section 8” refers to Section 8 of the federal Housing Act of 1937. This section authorizes
project-based rental assistance programs under which a participating owner, or landlord, is
required to reserve units in a building for low-income tenants, in return for a federal government
guarantee to make up the difference between the tenant's contribution and the rent in the owner's
contract with the government.
What is a Section 8 voucher?
Section 8 of the federal Housing Act also authorizes vouchers for low-income individuals. HUD
manages the Housing Choice Voucher Program, which provides financial assistance directly to
the landlord for a family that qualifies. The Housing Choice Voucher Program is the federal
government's major program for assisting very low-income families, the elderly, and the disabled
to afford decent, safe, and sanitary housing in the private market. Since housing assistance is
provided on behalf of the family or individual, participants are able to find their own housing,
including single-family homes, townhouses and apartments, and are free to choose any housing
option that meets the requirements of the program.
Housing choice vouchers are administered locally by public housing agencies (PHAs). The
PHAs receive federal funds from HUD to administer the voucher program. A list of public
housing authorities in Texas can be found at
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/public_indian_housing/pha/contacts/
tx
A housing subsidy is paid to the landlord directly by the PHA on behalf of the participating
family. The family then pays the difference between the actual rent charged by the landlord and
the amount subsidized by the program.
Can a city make being homeless illegal?
No. Laws that punish status or condition rather than criminal conduct have been struck down by
courts as constituting cruel and unusual punishment. These types of laws fail to give fair notice
of prohibited conduct and encourage arbitrary arrests and convictions. Additionally, courts have
overturned vagrancy laws, or laws that criminalize being homeless, as impermissible restrictions
on an individual’s right to travel. See Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 45 U.S. 156,
162(1972); Handler v. Denver, 77 P.2d 132, 135 (Colo. 1938); Pottinger v. City of Miami, 810 F.
Supp. 1551, 1578 (S.D. Fla. 1992).
Can the city enact a loitering prohibition?
Maybe. In a 1983 decision in Kolender v. Lawson, the United State Supreme Court invalidated a
California loitering statute requiring street wanderers to present valid identification when
stopped by police officers. The Court held that the statute was too vague to satisfy due process
requirements. The Court followed this decision with its decision in Chicago v. Morales, which
struck down a Chicago ordinance preventing loitering by gang members on due process grounds.
An ordinance that is general in nature that criminalizes loitering on a public street would most
likely be struck down by a court for vagueness. However, if the wording of the ordinance is
sufficient to set forth guidelines for law enforcement officers narrowly tailoring the restriction to
those who loiter with a specific illegal purpose, then a loitering ordinance may pass
constitutional muster. City officials will want to work closely with their local legal counsel if
they desire to adopt such an ordinance.
Can a city prevent homeless people from panhandling in all public places?
No. Litigation related to bans on panhandling has centered on First Amendment free speech
claims. Courts have ruled that outlawing panhandling in all public places was unconstitutional.
See generally Young v. New York City Transit Auth., 903 F.2d 146 (2d Cir. 1990); Speet v.
Schuette, 889 F. Supp. 2d 969 (W.D. Mich. 2012). Instead, any limits on panhandling on public
sidewalks trigger strict scrutiny, meaning the regulations must be narrowly tailored to serve a
significant governmental interest and must be the least restrictive means for achieving that
interest. Courts have found that safety and traffic congestion may be significant interests but
“mere annoyance” is not a sufficiently compelling reason to absolutely deprive an individual of
his or her First Amendment rights.
What strategies have cities used to reduce homelessness?
 Participating in the “Mayors Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness,” a program
designed to equip city leaders with tools to combat veteran homelessness. For more
information on how to participate, you can visit the Department of Housing and Urban
Development’s Mayors Challenge page at
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/comm_planning/veteran_info
rmation/mayors_challenge/mayors_and_staff;
 Seeking state grants awarded by the Texas Department of Housing and Community
Affairs or federal grants awarded by HUD;
 Educating law enforcement officers on alternatives to issuing citations and supporting
police department partnerships with mental health partners;
 Recruiting landlords in the city to assist in providing housing opportunities for
individuals and families experiencing homelessness;
 Educating municipal court personnel on providing referrals to municipal court defendants
to non-profit groups in the city that provide housing and other services;
 Issuing general obligation bonds for the purpose of expanding affordable housing in the
city;
 Creating a housing authority to assist with providing affordable housing within the city.
What is a housing authority?
A housing authority is a public body that is created for clearance, replanning, and reconstruction
of areas in which unsanitary or unsafe housing exists and for providing safe and sanitary housing
for persons of low income.
The housing authority may provide for the construction, improvement, alteration, or repair of a
housing project, or part of a housing project, in its area of operation. A housing authority may
also lease or rent housing, land, buildings, structures, or facilities included in a housing project.
A housing authority is able to borrow money or accept grants or other financial assistance from
the federal government for a housing project in the authority's area of operation, or form a
partnership or another entity to raise capital for a housing project to be owned by the partnership
or other entity.
How does our city create a housing authority?
The city council may declare by resolution that there is a need for a housing authority in the city
if it finds that there is: (1) unsanitary or unsafe inhabited housing in the city; or (2) a shortage of
safe or sanitary housing in the city available to persons of low income at rentals that they can
afford. TEX. LOC. GOV’T CODE § 392.011. The council may determine on its own motion if there
is a need for a housing authority but must determine there is a need upon receiving a petition
signed by at least 100 qualified voters of the city.
Who appoints members of a housing authority?
Each municipal housing authority is governed by either five, seven, nine, or 11 commissioners.
The mayor of the city appoints the commissioners of the authority, and an appointed
commissioner of the authority may not be an officer or employee of the city. TEX. LOC. GOV’T
CODE § 392.031. After the appointment, a certificate of the appointment of a commissioner must
be filed with the city secretary.
A city with a municipal housing authority composed of five commissioners must appoint at least
one commissioner to the authority who is a tenant of a public housing project over which the
authority has jurisdiction. TEX. LOC. GOV’T CODE § 392.0331. A city with a municipality with a
municipal housing authority composed of seven or more commissioners must appoint at least
two commissioners to the authority who are tenants of a public housing project over which the
authority has jurisdiction.
What is the term of office for a housing authority commissioner?
Initially, a housing authority with five commissioners must have two designated to serve oneyear terms and three designated to serve two-year terms. A housing authority with seven
commissioners must have three designated to serve one-year terms and four designated to serve
two-year terms. A housing authority with nine commissioners must have four designated to serve
one-year terms and five designated to serve two-year terms. Finally, a housing authority with 11
commissioners must have five designated to serve one-year terms and six designated to serve
two-year terms. Subsequent municipal housing commissioners are appointed for two-year terms.
If there is a vacancy on the housing authority board, the mayor appoints someone to fill the
unexpired term. TEX. LOC. GOV’T CODE § 392.034.

