Introduction
CHFA’s vision is that everyone will have the opportunity for housing stability and economic prosperity, two things that underserved markets often consider out of reach. To support recent initiatives to reduce the homeownership gap between White homeowners and minority homeowners, CHFA is continuously engaging with community to learn how to provide products and services in a meaningful way.
Throughout this engagement, CHFA has heard two consistent requests: to meet homebuyers where they are, and to provide expansive homebuying resources that they can trust to support them on the path to homeownership. Often, community members cite the overabundance of information as being overwhelming and sometimes misleading. As the state housing and finance authority, CHFA is looked to as a trusted resource, so we developed the Homebuyer’s Roadmap to help people access requested information at their own pace.
The Homebuyer’s Roadmap is available online and in a printed folder with supplemental inserts so homebuyers can select the option that works best for them. It begins by introducing CHFA and helping the user understand CHFA’s mission and vision, along with how CHFA can help them on their homebuying journey, before breaking the homebuying process into 10 “stops on the homebuying journey.” The interactive online version allows users to “choose their own adventure” by selecting the stop of most interest based on where they are in the homebuying process. They can also dig deeper into topics of interest by using the additional resource links throughout, which open as pop-ups with summary information or in a new tab. For the printed folder, many of these additional resources are provided as inserts.
Navigation is intuitive; no matter where the user is within the Roadmap, they can use the navigation ribbon on the right of the screen to visit other stops, or the overarching navigation buttons on the bottom-right to visit the home page or the “stops” page. The Roadmap also encourages continued engagement with CHFA: after the final stop, which shares resources to help people maintain homeownership, users can click to a final screen showing links to newsletters, homebuying classes, and our “Help for Homebuyers” site.
The Roadmap has been well received. Since October 2023, it has been viewed by 1,335 users an average of 5.24 times each, showing that people are returning to use it as they progress in their homebuying journey. In addition, 182 people have requested a printed copy.
It is innovative and meets a state housing need.
Colorado Housing and Finance Authority CHFA Homebuyer’s Roadmap Homeownership – Empowering New Buyers
 
Colorado Housing and Finance Authority CHFA Homebuyer’s Roadmap Homeownership – Empowering New Buyers
Based on community feedback, we learned that there was a gap in current homebuying educational offerings. We heard from many potential homebuyers that while they wanted to be as informed as possible about the homebuying process, they felt overwhelmed by the sheer amount of information available. Other “roadmap” communications vacillated between two extremes: having limited space to convey adequate information (such as in a print flyer) or trying to include everything in an effort to educate, which resulted in readers losing focus or not being able to locate the exact information they were looking for (such as on a web page).
CHFA’s own products illustrate this gap: we offer a high-level Steps to Homeownership on our site, a one- hour Homebuyer 101 webinar, and an in-depth homebuyer education class for certification (classes last between six to eight hours). The shorter, more high-level options are suited for those just getting started, and the longer class is great for those homebuyers who are moving forward with a purchase, but we were missing the middle piece: a resource that was interactive, allowing homebuyers to navigate at their own pace and quickly find more in-depth information.
The design of the Roadmap was instrumental in this delivery. In addition to the intuitive navigation throughout, pop-ups, information buttons, and third-party links kept the screens uncluttered and let each user create their own experience. While there is a wealth of information, it never feels overwhelming. Utilizing movement throughout creates a fresh and engaging experience while highlighting the individual resources.
It demonstrates effective use of resources, benefits outweighing costs, and a replicable development process.
The Roadmap is an in-house product. Content was developed collaboratively by marketing and home finance team members, the design was completed in Adobe InDesign, and the finished digital product was easily uploaded and integrated into our website functionality. Content updates are easy to implement in the digital version, and we printed a low count of the folder to reduce waste when changes are needed. All the supplements in the folder are those that were already developed prior to the Roadmap launch and are used in other outreach and communication activities. A two-year content review schedule will help to ensure that information is accurate and current.
Overall costs were minimal; the development was incorporated into staff project flow, and the only additional costs are for the small-batch folder printing and individual mailings for requests. The accessibility of the product is also a benefit: it is free, print versions are mailed within one business day of request, and no specific software is required for viewing the online version.
It effectively employes partnerships with industry professionals.
When creating the Roadmap, we wanted to deliver something that lenders, real estate agents, and homebuyer education providers could use with their customers to elevate themselves as a resource. Throughout development, feedback was sought from our Lender Advisory Group and real estate agents regarding content and utilization. Traditionally, our partners value CHFA collateral that they can leverage
2

for homebuyer engagement. In the words of one, “Why would we do it if CHFA already has and much better than we could?”
It helps CHFA achieve strategic objectives.
One of CHFA’s main goals (and a market differentiator) is that we require homebuyer education course completion to be eligible for our loan products. This is because we know that an informed homebuyer makes a successful homeowner. Many customers cite the course as one of the best values of being a CHFA customer. The Homebuyer’s Roadmap is yet another way for us to help homebuyers feel informed and confident when purchasing a home.
As stated at the beginning, it is an accessible resource that helps to “meet people where they are,” be that where they are in the homebuying process, or in which medium they prefer (online or in print). By providing a simple design with interactive topics, the Homebuyer’s Roadmap allows homebuyers to “choose their own adventure” at the pace with which they are comfortable, and further establishes CHFA as a valuable resource for homebuyers and industry professionals.