INTRODUCTION
 Although periorbital hyperpigmentation (also called peri- palpebral hyperpigmentation, dark eyelids, dark eye circles, dark circles, or simply under-eye circles) is a mere color difference between the palpebral skin and the remaining facial skin, it makes people look tired or older, which negatively affects their quality of life. 1,-4
 

 It has a higher prevalence in individuals with darker skin, hair and eyes, and affects age groups and genders equally. Nevertheless, there are a higher number of complaints from women, especially senior women. There are few studies about the etiology of this condition, however dark eye circles with a vascular component are known to present a dominant autoso- mal family inheritance pattern. 2,3
 

 Periorbital hyperpigmentation seems to have multifactori- al causes that involve intrinsic factors (determined by the indi- vidual''''''''s genetics), and extrinsic factors (sun exposure, smoking, alcoholism and sleep deprivation, for instance). However, the presence of melanic pigment and hemosiderotic pigment in the affected sites is a distinctive feature in its etiopathogeny. 2-4
 

 Melanic hyperpigmentation is more frequent in brunet adults, as a consequence of excessive and cumulative exposure to the sun, which increases the production of melanin, reduces the skin''''''''s thickness and increases the dilatation of blood vessels. 2,4,5
 

 Intense vascularization is mainly found in people belong- ing to certain ethnic groups such as Arabs, Turks, Hindus, inhab- itants of the Iberian Peninsula and their respective descendants. In these ethnicities, its manifestation tends to take place earlier, often during childhood. In those individuals there is no change in the color of the skin; the eyelid appears darkened because the dilated vessels are visible due to the transparency of the skin. 2 In those cases, therefore, the problem is often aggravated when the lower eyelid''''''''s vessels are more dilated (e.g., from fatigue, insom- nia, oral breathing, crying), causing dermal blood extravasation. The liberation of ferric ions takes place locally, entailing the for- mation of free radicals that stimulate the melanocytes, which generates melanic pigmentation. 2, 4-6
 

 Other causes noted as being responsible for the appearance of dark eye circles are post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation secondary to atopic and contact dermatitis, sleep deprivation, oral breathing, alcoholism, smoking, use of certain medications (contraceptives, chemotherapy, antipsychotic and some types of eye drops), the presence of palpebral sagging (due to aging) and of disorders that develop with hydric retention and palpebral edema (thyroid disorders, nephropathies, cardiopathies and pneumopathies) – all of which worsen the unattractive appear- ance of dark eye circles. 2-4,7
 

 Various treatments have been proposed for periorbital hyperchromia, however there are few studies on their long-term efficacy. The main types of treatment are: topical application of depigmenting products, chemical peelings, dermabrasion, cryosurgery, fillings with hyaluronic acid, intense pulsed light, CO2, argon, ruby and excimer lasers. 2-4, 6, 8-12
 

 PALPEBRAL ANATOMY
 The eyelids are tegumentary pleats that participate in facial expression and aesthetics, however their main function is to pro- tect the eyeballs through sensorial filtration actions carried out by the palpebral cilia, and the Meibomian and lachrymal glands'''''''' secretions. In this manner, the cornea remains hydrated and the closing movements of the eyes function as a barrier to external traumas and prevent the cornea from drying out. 13-17
 

 The upper eyelid reaches upwards to the eyebrow, which separates it from the forehead. The lower eyelid extends down- wards up to the lower border of the orbit, and is delimited by the genian region. 15
 

 The palpebral fissure, which measures 9-10 mm in adults, is determined by the interaction of the muscles that open and close the eyelids. To open the eyelid, the palpebral elevator mus- cle is assisted by two other accessory muscles (Muller''''''''s and frontalis muscles). 18 The aging process decreases the palpebral fis- sure''''''''s vertical opening, due to the progressive lowering of the upper eyelid, 14 which is caused by a decrease in the upper eye- lid lifter muscle''''''''s aponeurosis action. 15 The skin becomes more flaccid, less elastic and has a greater propensity to wrinkle 16. The orbicular and tarsal muscles, the orbital septum and the conjunctival mucous membrane also go through transforma- tions in the elderly. In addition, gravity and facial expressions influence the mechanical deformation of those structures. 17
 

 A cohort study with 320 patients (aged 10-89) evaluated participants'''''''' eyelids frontally and laterally and found that there is a correlation between a decrease in the palpebral fissure and an increase in the age of patients. 19
 

 PALPEBRAL REGION''''''''S SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
 Palpebral skin is the thinnest in the human body (< 1 mm). Its epidermis is constituted of stratified epithelium, which is very thin (0.4 mm) compared to that of the palmoplantar region (the thickness of which is approximately 1.6 mm). 13
 

 The nasal portion of the palpebral skin has thinner hair and more sebaceous glands (i.e., it is softer and oilier) than its tem- poral portion. The transition between the eyelids'''''''' thin skin and the remaining facial skin is clinically observable. 13
 

 The palpebral dermis is composed of loose conjunctive tissue, and is extremely thin in that region. It is absent in the pre-tarsal skin, in the medial and lateral ligaments of the eyelid, where the skin adheres to the underlying fibrous tissue. The thinness of the skin, combined with the lack of fatty tissue, gives that region its characteristic translucency. As a result, the accu- mulation of melanin and/or vessel dilatation in that region can be easily seen, through transparency, as bilateral homogeneous hyperpigmentation. 2,4,5,13
 

 PALPEBRAL REGION''''''''S VENOUS AND LYMPH VASCULARIZATION
 The eyelids'''''''' arterial irrigation comes through many vessels: the supratrochlear, supraorbital, lachrymal and dorsum of the nose arteries (all originating in the facial artery); the angular artery (originating in the facial artery); the transverse artery (originating in the facial artery); the transverse facial artery (originating in the superficial temporal artery) and the branch- es of the superficial temporal artery itself 20 (Figure 1).
 

 Venous drainage (following an external pattern) takes place through the veins associated with these arteries and (following an internal pattern) penetrates the orbit through connections with ophthalmic veins 20 (Figure 2).
 

 Lymphatic drainage takes place mainly through the parotid lymph nodes; some of the drainage from the medial angle of the eye to the lymph vessels is associated with the angular and facial arteries, towards the submandibular lymph nodes. 20
 

 COLOR OF THE SKIN IN THE PALPEBRAL REGION
 The palpebral skin''''''''s color results from the combination of several factors, some of genetic-racial origin (such as the amount of melanin pigment), others of individual or regional and even gender l origins, such as the thickness of the several components and the blood volume in their vessels.