Fasted cardiovascular exercise was recommended by approximately two-thirds of par-
ticipant coaches, with the most common reason for preference being the added utilization
of yohimbine, growth hormone, and clenbuterol (their combination with fasted exercise
is thought to enhance fat loss). A systematic review reported that fasted cardiovascular
exercise is not more effective than fed cardiovascular exercise [13 ]. Notably, none of the
studies included in the systematic review recruited competitive bodybuilders as subjects,
nor did they look at subjects utilizing fasted cardiovascular exercise in tandem with these
specific PEDs for an additional fat-burning effect. A review article by Escalante et al. sug-
gests that physique athletes may perform fasted cardio at varying intensities, but it is not
suggested for longer than 60 min to prevent fat-free mass losses [14]. Future research in
this population is needed in which fasted cardiovascular exercise is paired with fat-burning
compounds to determine if this pairing is (1) safe and (2) efficacious for fat loss outcomes.
Participant coaches notably did not prefer HIIT cardiovascular exercise over LISS
or MISS cardiovascular exercise for any of the populations. This recommendation is in
line with previous research, as a systematic review and meta-analysis reported similarly
effective fat-burning effects between HIIT and MISS [15 ]. Furthermore, authors of a
narrative review suggested that HIIT cardiovascular exercise should not be used too
frequently due to the increased recovery demands during natural bodybuilding contest
preparation [16]. Further research in both enhanced and natural populations is warranted
on this topic.
Participant coaches recommended that female athletes perform more cardiovascular
exercise during contest preparation, up to 740 min (12+ h) per week, and male bodybuilding
athletes up to 480 min (8 h) per week. Given the potential of high volumes of resistance
training to induce additional fatigue while dieting, authors of some reviews recommend the
lowest amount of cardiovascular exercise needed to achieve the desired result to mitigate
any negative impact of cardiovascular training [16 , 17]. The range of cardiovascular exercise
frequencies and durations for athletes is notably very wide, and this is likely due to the
individuality of every athlete’s energy expenditure, current body composition, genetics,
timeline to achieve stage-leanness, required leanness for their respective division, and indi-
vidual preference. Neither coaches nor researchers may be able to provide generalizations
about the amount of cardiovascular exercise that will be required to obtain the desired
leanness for specific divisions due to the individuality of each athlete.