1.2 History of poliomyelitis and polio vaccines
Poliomyelitis is a disease of great antiquity. Perhaps the earliest description is
evident in an Egyptian stele from around 1350 BC depicting a young man with
typical asymmetric flaccid paralysis and atrophy of the leg. Several scattered reports
of the disease also appear in the literature from the 17th and 18th century. By the
mid-19th century, the Industrial Revolution had brought increased urbanization to
Europe and North America and, with it, significant changes and improvements in
living conditions. Coincident with these massive changes was the advent of larger
and more frequent outbreaks of poliomyelitis. From the late 1800s, outbreaks were
occurring in several European countries and in the United States, and they remained
a dominant public health problem in the developed world for the first half of the
20th century.
A major landmark in the study of poliomyelitis was the successful passage of the
virus to nonhuman primates by Landsteiner and Popper in 1909. The availability of
animal models provided the first opportunity to study the disease outside of human
patients and produced important information on the process of infection and the
pathophysiology of the disease. Further studies on the infectious agent awaited the
crucial development by Enders, Weller, and Robbins in 1949 of tissue culture
systems for in vitro propagation of the virus. This advance, and the recognition of
three distinct serotypes, opened the way for all subsequent work on vaccines and
study of the biochemical and biophysical properties of the polioviruses.
By the 1950s, two different approaches to the prevention of poliomyelitis by
vaccination were developed. Salk and Younger produced the first successful polio
vaccine in 1954 by chemical inactivation of tissue culture-propagated virus using
formaldehyde. This vaccine was completely non-infectious, yet, following injection,
it elicited an immune response that was protective against paralytic disease. During
the same period, many laboratories sought to produce live, attenuated polio
vaccines. The OPV strains of Sabin were licensed in 1961 following extensive field
trials in the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and Latin America. Mass
immunization campaigns in many countries began in 1962 and 1963. Both the
inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and OPV contain three components, one for each
immunologically distinct serotype of poliovirus. Some countries use enhanced IPV
(eIPV) that contains higher D-antigenic units per dose for types 2 and 3 than
standard IPV. Widespread immunization with IPV, and since 1963 with OPV, has
virtually eliminated poliomyelitis in most developed countries.

1.3 Characterization of the pathogen
The polioviruses belong to the genus Enterovirus in the family Picornaviridae. All
are small, round 30 nm particles with icosahedral symmetry, and they contain no
essential lipid envelope. Polioviruses share most of their biochemical and
biophysical characteristics with the other enteroviruses and are different from some
of the other picornaviruses. The viral particles have a buoyant density of 1.34 g/ml
in caesium chloride and a sedimentation coefficient of approximately 156S. The
infectious particles are relatively heat resistant (when stabilized by magnesium
cations), resistant to acid pH (pH 3 to 5 for one to three hours), and also resistant to
WHO/IVB/04.10 5
many common detergents and disinfectants, including common soap, non-ionic
detergents, ether, chloroform, and other lipid solvents. The virus is stable for weeks
at 4°C and for days at room temperature. Drying, ultraviolet light, high heat,
formaldehyde, and free chlorine, however, readily inactivate the virus.
Polioviruses and the enteroviruses are distinguished from the other picornaviruses
on the basis of physical properties such as buoyant density in caesium chloride and
stability in weak acid. The three poliovirus serotypes are distinguished from the
other enteroviruses by neutralization with serotype-specific antisera and the
propensity to cause paralytic illness. The Mahoney strain of type 1 poliovirus is the
prototype for the polioviruses, the genus enterovirus, and the family Picornaviridae.
It is among the most-studied and best-characterized agents of human disease.
The poliovirus consists of 60 copies each of four polypeptide chains that form a
very highly structured shell. Located inside this shell, the viral genome consists of a
single molecule of ribonucleic acid (RNA), which is about 7500 nucleotides long.
The four capsid polypeptides are produced by the proteolytic cleavage of a single
polyprotein precursor, and are designated VP1 through VP4. Attached covalently to
the amino-terminal of the VP4 protein is a single molecule of myristilate. In
addition, one small protein, VPg, is covalently attached to the 5'-end of the viral
RNA. A major advance in studies on the structure of polioviruses occurred with the
solution of the crystal structure to a resolution of 0.29 nm. From the
three-dimensional structure of the poliovirus, VP1 contributes the majority of the
amino acid residues on the virus surface, VP2 and VP3 are partially exposed on the
surface, and VP4 is completely internal.
The information concerning the surface of the virus has been particularly useful in
understanding the neutralization of poliovirus by antibodies. Studies with
monoclonal neutralizing antibodies and mutant viruses resistant to them have
revealed four main antigenic sites on the virus. The relative importance of individual
sites is different for each of the three serotypes of poliovirus. The X-ray crystal
structure has confirmed that the antigenic sites are composed of amino acid residues
located on the virus surface and exposed loops of capsid proteins. Adjacent domains
of the same and other capsid proteins influence the conformation of the loops. This
explains why antigenicity of the virus is destroyed by disruption of the virus
structure. In addition, there are other antigenic sites that elicit an immune response
that is not neutralizing.
The poliovirus-neutralizing antibody response is serotype-specific, with the
exception of some minor cross-reaction between poliovirus 1 and 2. Heat-disrupted
viruses, particularly those heated in the presence of detergent, induce antibodies that
react with many enteroviruses. These broadly reacting antibodies are generally not
neutralizing. Antisera raised in animals to each of the viruses are largely
type-specific and are used for the determination of serotype in a neutralization assay.
Although more than one T-cell epitope has been described in both structural and
non-structural viral proteins, the role of cell-mediated immunity in controlling
infection has not been determined.
6 Polio laboratory manual
Polioviruses are among the simplest viruses in terms of genetic complexity and size.
The RNA genomes from all three serotypes of poliovirus have been cloned and
sequenced. The genomic RNA is infectious and serves as messenger RNA for viral
protein synthesis. The RNA is translated in a single open reading frame into one
large polyprotein, which is then processed through proteolytic cleavage by two
distinct virus-encoded proteases into the functional viral proteins (Figure 1.2).
Despite much research and the simple nature of the virus, several steps of the virus
growth cycle have remained elusive, including the site and mode of virus entry and
release of the genome into the cytoplasm. Polioviruses initially bind to a specific
plasma membrane protein, the poliovirus receptor (PVR; CD155), a member of the
immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins. The binding to the receptor triggers
conformational changes in the capsid structure that are necessary for the release of
the genome into the cytoplasm (uncoating). No other picornaviruses use this
protein as their cellular receptor, a fact that has been exploited in the eradication
programme by the use of a recombinant murine cell line expressing the human PVR
to selectively isolate polioviruses.
Once the viral genome has entered the cell, the replication cycle begins when the
viral RNA is transcribed by the viral polymerase beginning at the 3'-end of the
infecting viral RNA to generate a complementary RNA (cRNA). In the next step,
which is dependent on a “host factor”, the progeny viral RNA is synthesized from
the cRNA. The newly synthesized viral RNA is covalently linked to the VPg
protein at the 5'- end of the RNA, and then only the positive sense strand of RNA
is encapsidated in the viral structural proteins to form infectious viral particles. The
extensive studies into virus replication and assembly have resulted in the remarkable
accomplishment of complete cell-free replication of poliovirus beginning only with
the viral RNA.