Ambiguity is celebrated in human language. It is a central feature of
literature, poetry, and humor. Ambiguity is anathema to computer language.
An ambiguous computer language is a nonsensical concept because the
predictability of computers is what gives part of their value; imagine a
computer that was asked, “what is 1 and 1” it randomly returned either “two”
or “11”. Although it is debatable whether every contract can be translated into
machine language, many of them can be.73 When lawyers or the programmers
they hire write contracts in code, there is less of a chance for ambiguity than
in natural language if only for the simple fact that artificial language must be
complete and predefined, whereas natural language is infinite.74 That is to say
a person can walk around and verbally recite lines of code and people can at
least understand what he is saying; a machine cannot understand human
language that it is not programmed to understand. All of this is simply to say
that the problem of ambiguity is reduced in the smart contract context.
Finally, all of the usual defenses to formation of a contract also apply
in the realm of smart contracts, although as will be seen later, enforcing the
remedy against a strong smart contract may prove problematic to a court.
Take unconscionability and illegality, for instance. If a vending machine were
to sell alcohol to minors or sell alcohol in a dry jurisdiction, then the contract
could be voided as illegal.75 As will be discussed, the remedies will be either
ex post through legal action or ex ante through regulation. In this instance, the
illegal contract can either be policed through a prohibition on alcoholic
vending machines76 or a system of preclearance where a driver’s license
scanner or some mechanism are required to ensure compliance with age
requirements. Similarly, suppose the vending machine charged $1,000 for a
can of Coke and a court were to find this to be substantively unconscionable.
The remedies would again either be in damages or in policing the use of such
vending machines before the contract could be formed.