Chapter 4: Batteries for Grid Applications
Overview
Batteries are devices that store energy chemically. This report focuses on “secondary” batteries,
which must be charged before use and which can be discharged and recharged (cycled) many
times before the end of their useful life. For electric power grid applications, there are four main
battery types of interest:
 Lead-acid
 High temperature “sodium-beta”
 Liquid electrolyte “flow” batteries
 Other emerging chemistries84
Lead-acid batteries have been used for more than a century in grid applications and in
conventional vehicles for starting, lighting, and ignition (SLI). They continue to be the
technology of choice for vehicle SLI applications due to their low cost. Consequently, they are
manufactured on a mass scale. In 2010, approximately 120 million lead-acid batteries were
shipped in North America alone.85 Lead-acid batteries are commonly used by utilities to serve as
uninterruptible power supplies in substations, and have been used at utility scale in several
demonstration projects to provide grid support.86 Use of lead acid batteries for grid applications is
limited by relatively short cycle life. R&D efforts are focused on improved cycle-life, which
could result in greater use in utility-scale applications.
Sodium-beta batteries include sodium-sulfur (NaS) units, first developed in the 1960s,87 and
commercially available from a single vendor (NGK Insulators, Ltd.) in Japan with over 270 MW
deployed worldwide.88 A NaS battery was first deployed in the United States in 2002.
89 There are
now a number of U.S. demonstration projects, including several listed in Table 3. The focus of
NaS deployments in the United States has been in electric distribution deferral projects, acting to
reduce peak demand on distribution systems, but they also can serve multiple grid support
services. An alternative high-temperature battery, sodium-nickel-chloride, is in the early stages of commercialization.

“Flow” batteries, in which a liquid electrolyte flows through a chemical cell to produce
electricity, are in the early stages of commercialization. In grid applications there has been some
deployment of two types of flow battery: vanadium redox and zinc-bromide. There are a number
of international installations of vanadium redox units, including a 250 kW installation in the
United States to relieve a congested transmission line.
91 There are also a number of zinc-bromine
demonstration projects.92 Several other flow battery chemistries have been pursued or are under
development, but are less mature.
In addition to the three battery types discussed above, there are several emerging technologies
based on new battery chemistries which may also have potential in grid applications. Several of
these emerging technologies are being supported by DOE efforts such as ARPA-E and are
discussed briefly in the R&D section of this chapter.

Technology
Description and Performance
Lead-Acid
The lead-acid battery consists of a lead dioxide positive electrode (cathode), a lead negative
electrode (anode), and an aqueous sulfuric acid electrolyte which carries the charge between the
two. During discharge, each electrode is converted to lead sulfate, consuming sulfuric acid from
the electrolyte. When recharging, the lead sulfate is converted back to sulfuric acid, leaving a layer of lead dioxide on the cathode and pure lead on the anode. In such conventional “wet”
(flooded) cells, water in the electrolyte is broken down to hydrogen and oxygen during the
charging process. In a vented wet cell design, these gases escape into the atmosphere, requiring
the occasional addition of water to the system. In sealed wet cell designs, the loss of these gases is
prevented and their conversion back to water is possible, reducing maintenance requirements.
However, if the battery is overcharged or charged too quickly, the rate of gas generation can
surpass that of water recombination, which can cause an explosion.
In “valve regulated gel” designs, silica is added to the electrolyte to cause it to gel. In “absorbed
glass mat” designs, the electrolyte is suspended in a fiberglass mat. The latter are sometimes
referred to as “dry” because the fiberglass mat is not completely saturated with acid and there is
no excess liquid. Both designs operate under slight constant pressure. Both also eliminate the risk
of electrolyte leakage and offer improved safety by using valves to regulate internal pressure due
to gas build up, but at significantly higher cost than wet cells described above.93
Lead-acid is currently the lowest-cost battery chemistry on a dollar-per-kWh basis. However, it
also has relatively low specific energy (energy per unit mass) on the order of 35 Wh/kg and
relatively poor “cycle life,” which is the number of charge-discharge cycles it can provide before
its capacity falls too far below a certain percentage (e.g., 80%) of its initial capacity. While the
low energy density of lead-acid will likely limit its use in transportation applications, increase in
cycle life could make lead-acid cost-effective in grid applications.
The cycle life of lead-acid batteries is highly dependent on both the rate and depth of discharge
due to corrosion and material shedding off of electrode plates inside the battery. High depth of
discharge (DoD) operation intensifies both issues. At 100% DoD (discharging the battery
completely) cycle life can be less than 100 full cycles for some lead-acid technologies. During
high rate, partial state-of-charge operation, lead sulfate accumulation on the anode can be the
primary cause of degradation. These processes are also sensitive to high temperature, where the
rule of thumb is to reduce battery life by half for every 8°C (14°F) increase in temperature above
ambient.
94 Manufacturers’ warrantees provide some indication of minimum performance
expectations, with service life of three to five years for deep cycle batteries, designed to be mostly
discharged time after time. SLI batteries in cars have expected service lives of five to seven years,
with up to 30 discharges per year depending on the rate of discharge. Temperature also affects
capacity, with a battery at -4°C (25°F) having between roughly 70% and 80% of the capacity of a
battery at 24°C (75°F).95
For many applications of lead-acid batteries, including SLI and uninterruptible power supply
(UPS), efficiency of the batteries is relatively unimportant. One estimate for the DC-DC (direct
current) efficiency of utility-scale lead acid battery is 81%, and AC-AC (alternating current)
efficiency of 70%-72%.9

High Temperature Sodium-Beta
Sodium-beta batteries use molten (liquid) sodium for the anode, with sodium ions transporting the
electric charge. The two main types of sodium-beta batteries are distinguished by the type of
cathode they use. The sodium-sulfur (Na-S) type employs a liquid sulfur cathode, while the sodium-nickel chloride (Na-NiCl2) type employs a solid metal chloride cathode. Both types
include a beta-alumina solid electrolyte material separating the cathode and anode. This ceramic
material offers ionic conductivity similar to that of typical aqueous electrolytes, but only at high
temperature. Consequently, sodium-beta batteries ordinarily must operate at temperatures around
300°C (572°F).
97 The impermeability of the solid electrolyte to liquid electrodes and its minimal
electrical conductivity eliminates self discharge and allows high efficiency.98
Technical challenges associated with sodium-beta battery chemistry generally stem from the high
temperature requirements. To maintain a 300°C operating point the battery must have insulation
and active heating. If it is not maintained at such a temperature, the resulting freeze-thaw cycles
and thermal expansion can lead to mechanical stresses, damaging seals and other cell
components, including the electrolyte.
99 The fragile nature of the electrolyte is also a concern,
particularly for Na-S cells. In the event of damage to the solid electrolyte, a breach could allow
the two liquid electrodes to mix, possibly causing an explosion and fire.
100
Na-S batteries are manufactured commercially for a variety of grid services ranging from shortterm rapid discharge services to long-term energy management services.101 The DC-DC efficiency
is about 85%. Calculation of the AC-AC efficiency is complicated by the need for additional
heating. The standby heat loss for each 50 kW module is between 2.2 and 3.4 kW. As a result of
this heat loss, plus losses in the power conversion equipment, the AC-AC efficiency for loadleveling services is estimated in the range of 75%-80%.102 Expected service life is 15 years at
90% DoD and 4500 cycles.103
The primary sodium-beta alternative to the Na-S chemistry, the Na-NiCl2 cell (typically called
the ZEBRA cell).104 Although ZEBRA batteries have been under development for over 20 years,
they are only in the early stages of commercialization.
105 Nickel chloride cathodes offer several
potential advantages including higher operating voltage, increased operational temperature range
(due in part to the lower melting point of the secondary electrolyte), a slightly less corrosive
cathode, and somewhat safer cell construction, since handling of metallic sodium—which is
potentially explosive—can be avoided.
106 They are likely to offer a slightly reduced energy
density.107


