FORBES > MONEY
3 Ways Credit Unions Can Attract More Millennial Members

Crissi Cole | Forbes Councils Member
Forbes Finance Council
COUNCIL POST | Membership (Fee-Based)
Feb 28, 2024, 07:00am EST

Crissi Cole is the CEO and founder of Penny Finance,
an online financial mentorship community for women.
GETTY
Where did you open your first bank account? For me, it
was with a credit union. I still remember how proud I
felt, strolling through the glass doors of Washington
Trust in Rhode Island to deposit hard-earned tips from
a summer job. That first check turned into a lifelong
relationship, and years later, I took out my first
mortgage with that same credit union.
Yet, for others around my age, this isn’t always the case.
Wooed by compelling adverts and household names, I
noticed that many of my friends housed their assets at
traditional financial institutions. In fact, only 14% of
Americans ages 25-34 are members of credit unions.
This is surprising when you consider credit unions’
advantages. For example, did you know that credit
unions are actually member-owned nonprofits?
According to Bankrate, this structure enables credit
unions to charge lower interest rates on loans and
higher yields on savings products. That’s why you may
have noticed competitive rates on a mortgage at your
local credit union, or better yields on share certificates
or savings accounts.
Between 2022 and 2045, baby boomers are projected to
hand down $72.6 trillion in assets to their heirs,
including Generation X and millennials. So, it’s more
important than ever for credit unions to appeal to
millennials.
How can credit unions attract and retain more
millennial members during the great wealth transfer? As
a fintech founder, a millennial and a credit union
member, here are three practical solutions that credit
unions can implement today.
Offer a competitive high-yield
savings account.
What’s a popular piece of financial advice I see
millennials passing on to their friends right now? Open
a high-yield savings account, like, yesterday. One of the
only upsides to high interest rates is the HYSA, and
millennials are taking note. As a credit union, one way
to attract millennial members—and to keep existing
members from moving their money out of your
MORE FROM FORBES ADVISOR
Best High-Yield Savings Accounts Of
2024
By Kevin Payne Contributor
Best 5% Interest Savings Accounts of
2024
By Cassidy Horton Contributor
ecosystem—is to offer a high-yield savings account with
competitive rates.
If your credit union can’t offer a HYSA right now, there
are strategic alternatives. For example, in 2022,
Farmers Insurance Group Federal Credit Union raised
the rate of its online savings account, eliminating its
tiers and minimum balance requirement, while keeping
the rate on its money market accounts static.
Tackle issues millennials care about.
Millennials hold 47% of student loan debt in the U.S.
Speaking from personal experience, this debt weighs
down heavily on us, limiting our upward mobility and
delaying experiences considered “rites of passage” for
previous generations, such as home ownership. Credit
unions can offer support to millennial members through
loan refinancing for better rates, but there’s the
opportunity to go further.
Giving members the tools to figure out their debt payoff
plan—in the form of online learning, planning and
calculators—can provide them the support they need to
get out of debt and, one day, into investing.
Provide next-gen financial planning.
Only one-sixth of credit unions in the U.S. offer financial
planning services, yet 85% of millennials and Gen Z seek
some form of behavioral coaching about their finances.
For credit unions, it’s challenging to scale an army of
advisors to serve this need. Plus, millennials often don’t
meet the asset minimum needed to hire an advisor.
That’s why it’s time to meet millennials where they are:
online.
Offering digital, nontraditional financial planning to
your millennial members is a way to be at the forefront
of money management. And if your credit union does
happen to offer wealth management, offering digital
planning solutions isn’t a conflict of interest; it’s an on-
ramp. Helping your members become financially
healthy today means they’re more likely to have
investable assets tomorrow, and if you have the data
infrastructure in place, you’ll be able to reroute them in
your ecosystem.
The information provided here is not investment, tax or
financial advice. You should consult with a licensed
professional for advice concerning your specific
situation.
Forbes Finance Council is an invitation-only
organization for executives in successful accounting,
financial planning and wealth management firms. Do I
qualify?
Follow me on Twitter or LinkedIn. Check
out my website.
Crissi Cole
Crissi Cole is the CEO and founder of Penny Finance, an online
nancial mentorship community for women. Read Crissi Cole's
full... Read More
ADVERTISEMENT
Editorial Standards Reprints & Permissions