Intermittent Fasting Myths
“It’s just starving yourself.”
Fasting is a planned action to avoid food for a set period of time. The body
can still use energy from its own fat stores during a fast, so it isn’t being
deprived. Starvation is completely different. It is unplanned, it doesn’t have a
chosen end point, and the body doesn’t have much stored energy that it can
use. It is simply untrue to say that fasting is the same as starving yourself!
“It will slow your metabolism.”
When someone follows a reduced calorie diet but continues to eat regularly (i.e., “little and
often”), insulin levels remain high for most of the day. This stops the body from using stored
fat for energy. It responds by reducing the amount of calories it burns, to save what energy
it does have (i.e., it slows your metabolism). Fasting is different. During a fast, insulin levels
are reduced, so fat stored in the body can be used for energy. This means that metabolism
does not need to be slowed down, as the body does not think it is being deprived.
“Breakfast is the most important meal of the day.”
In the morning, the body’s releases hormones to get us ready to start the day.
This causes the release of energy from the body’s stores, which means we
don’t actually need to eat something first thing in the morning, as the body is
being fed whether you eat something or not! No meal is more important than
any other. What does matter is that you get all the nutrients you need from
what you do eat.
“You’ll be deprived of essential nutrients.”
As long as a range of real foods are eaten in the non-fasting periods, there is no reason
that people who try intermittent fasting should experience any nutrient deficiencies.
“It’ll make your body break down muscle.”
If available, the body will always use glucose and/or fat for fuel. Your muscles,
and the proteins they are made up of, are only a last resort for this. Studies
have shown that intermittent fasting does not cause significant muscle loss,
and that levels of a growth hormone that protects muscles from being used
for energy are increased during a fast. It is important that sufficient protein
is eaten in the non-fasting periods though in order to support the growth
and maintenance of muscle mass.
“You’ll be hungry all the time and will just eat much more at the next meal.”
Studies have shown that missing a meal may result in slightly more food being eaten at
the next meal, but the total energy intake will still be less than if you had eaten both meals.
Fasting decreases hunger hormones and increases fullness. So although you may feel
hungry when you first try fasting, many people actually report reduced hunger once they
are used to it.
www.xperthealth.org.uk
Stay hydrated
When you eat, you get some water from your food. So during a fast, you
are missing out on some of the fluids you normally get. This can lead to you
becoming dehydrated, causing side effects such as tiredness and headaches.
Dehydration can also be mistaken for hunger, which can make it more difficult
to stick to your planned fast.
The best option for staying hydrated is water. If you want to make it a bit more exciting then
you can flavour it, with a slice of lemon, orange, lime or cucumber for example. Coffee (black or
flavoured with natural extracts), tea (black, green, herbal or fruit), or broth (bone or vegetable)
are all also suitable options.
Stick with it
You may struggle at first if you are not used to going for extended periods of
time without food, but much of this could be down to habit. If you have had
a set routine for a long time your body will expect to receive food at certain
times of the day. So when it doesn’t get the food it is expecting, this can
trigger feelings of hunger. Most people adapt quite quickly though, so find it
increasingly easy to fast. But in the short-term, make sure you have thought about what
you could do to try and distract yourself when you feel hungry.
Break your fast with nutritious foods
At the end of your fast, have a meal that includes plenty of real, minimally
processed food. Make sure this meal includes one or two portions of good
quality protein. This will help to satisfy your appetite, and to make sure your
body gets plenty of nutrients. Planning a meal that supports your dietary
approach but also includes some of your favourite foods to break your fast with can help to
motivate you to stick with it too.
Make sure you get enough salt
People often think salt is unhealthy, but we do need some in our diet. Sodium is an
essential nutrient, and the main source of it is salt. When you are not eating (i.e.,
during a fast), you are not taking in any salt. On top of this, the reduction in insulin
levels during fasting results in less salt being held in the blood. Signs of having
low sodium levels include dizziness (caused by a drop in blood pressure), muscle
cramps, headaches and tiredness. These symptoms can be fixed by making sure
you get enough salt and water. Salt can be added to meals in non-fasting periods, or you
can get more by having salted water or bone broth during fasting periods.
Don’t worry if you regain a bit of weight after a fast
When you fast you will lose weight because your body is using up some of your
stored fat for fuel. But you will also lose some weight for other reasons, including
that there will be less food and waste passing through your body. This means
that when you break your fast you might actually regain a little bit of weight. This
is completely normal though, so you should not feel disappointed. The good news
is that you will still have reduced the amount of fat stored in your body!