According to the OECD Report (2004) and Cox (2021) in Demographia International Housing Affordability 2021, Australian housing prices are overvalued and unaffordable. These reports indicated a 51.8 percent and 40 percent overvaluation in 2004 and 2021, respectively. The ratios of house prices to incomes and rents are also at the highest quantile of the OECD countries since 2003. In terms of affordability, Cox (2021) indicated that the median multiple of national house prices to household income was 6.4 times in Australia compared to the US’s 3.7 and UK’s 4.6 times in 2016. In the third quarter of 2021, the national house price to household income ratio deteriorated to 12.1 times to become severely unaffordable comparing to 5.1 times in UK and 5.0 times in the US (Cox 2022). In Sydney, it was 15.3 times, Melbourne 9.7 times, Adelaide 8 times, Perth 7.1 times and Brisbane 7.4 times, respectively. Generally, all five Australian major cities are in the severely unaffordable category. Sydney has become the second least affordable metropolitan in the world after Hong Kong. This overvaluation and severe unaffordability concur with increases in debt-to-income ratio, place Australia’s housing at the top quantile of the OECD countries. A recent study on the Australian housing market by Cho et al. (2021) asserts that the steadily increasing housing prices have attributed to a steady decline of home ownership. Additionally, they also found that the fundamental housing prices of all Australian cities are significantly overvalued. Melbourne and Sydney had their housing prices overvalued for the last two decades. The authors content that the near zero interest rate was one of the variables that affects the fundamental prices of the housing in Australia.
 Figure 1 presents the development of Australia housing prices from 1996 to 2021. As can be seen from this figure, housing prices have surpassed the performance of GDP per capital in the past few years. Since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) in 2008, researchers and industry analysts have been predicting an imminent housing market meltdown. Nonetheless, in the absence of a prominent trigger, the housing market crash predictions remains a common subject of talk until recently. In the past decade, despite being overvalued and coupled with high debt-to-income ratio, mortgage stress remains insignificant due to record low interest rates. An easing of monetary policy offers liquidity to the market whilst a contracting monetary policy works in the opposite direction. The historical low interest rate was one of the key factors that drove housing prices to greater heights (Cho et al. 2021). However, the recent surge in inflation rate has prompted the Reserve Bank of Australia to increase its cash rate each month since May 2022. These moves drive mortgage rates higher. The current high inflation and growing mortgage rates environment has put homeowners and investors into a new and uncertain situation. 
 Based on the Spearman’s rho results shown in Table 1, among the five cities under study, housing values of Sydney and Melbourne are positively associated and this relationship is significant. However, housing prices in these two cities are negatively associated with those of Adelaide, Brisbane and Gold Coast and Perth. Results also indicated that Adelaide, Brisbane and Gold Coast and Perth are positively associated with each other.
 On the other hand, analysis of the relationship between mortgage rate with variables included in this study indicate that there is an inverse relationship between mortgage rate with housing price of all cities, but this relationship is only significant for Sydney and Melbourne. A plausible reason is a higher mortgage rate in a stagnant wage growth and a high inflation environment has deteriorated borrowing power. With that, a house price correction is inevitable for the top two severely unaffordable cities. In addition, the mortgage rate was found to have a significant positive relationship with inflation rate and WTI crude, but it reported a significant negative relationship with ASX 200 performance.
 The increasing CPI over the past twelve months shows a negative relationship with housing prices in all five cities, but only Sydney and Melbourne are significantly affected. CPI is also showing a significant positive relationship with WTI crude and mortgage rate. In addition, result of the analysis also indicates a significant inverse relationship between CPI and ASX200 performance.
 A rise in WTI crude has two effects on housing. First, it brings about diminishing of spending power on other goods and services for individuals together with a lower demand of housing (Fereidouni 2010; Grossman et al. 2019). Second, it increases logistic cost which escalates building material and labour costs. Both forces are contradictory as the first one leads to more supply than demand, hence, a decrease in housing price whilst the latter push up housing prices due to higher construction cost. Spearman’s rho correlation analysis indicates a mild significant positive impact of WTI crude on Sydney’s housing price. Other cities however are displaying insignificant relationship with WTI crude movements.
 The literature generally indicates a negative relationship between the performance of the share market and interest rates (Bayer et al. 2013). A higher interest rate discourages investment and promotes savings. In addition, as investment in housing represents a substitution of share investment, a negative relationship is expected. Nonetheless, only Brisbane and Gold Coast, Perth and Adelaide are displaying the expected sign in the Spearman’s rho test analysis but insignificant. On the contrary, for the more affluent cities, such as Sydney and Melbourne, stock market performance is positively related to housing price movement. Possible explanations for this phenomenon are (i) investors are more affluent in these two cities and, therefore, are financially capable of forming a more diversified investment portfolio, (ii) investors from these two larger cities have better financial literacy and hence, value portfolio diversification more and do not view property and stock investment as substitutes. Bootstrap regression analysis was conducted on the variables under study and the findings are discussed in the next section.
 5.3. Bootstrap Regression Analysis and Results
 As can been seen from Table 2, regressions are performed on five models to gauge the relations of housing performance across five cities with independent variables including mortgage rates, WTI crude index and ASX200 index. Results of R2 obtained from the analyses indicate that independent variables included in the model are able to explain variations of the housing performance in Sydney by 84.4 percent and Melbourne 87.5 percent, whereas the other three cities are in the range of 0.1 to 5 percent. The findings in Panel 1 (Sydney) and 2 (Melbourne) reveal that there is a significant negative relationship between mortgage rate and housing performance of Sydney and Melbourne. These findings are consistent with Chong (2020), Xu and Tang (2014) and Chong and Liew 2020). However, housing prices in smaller cities including Perth, Adelaide and Brisbane and Gold Coast are unaffected by interest rate during the study period. Indeed, larger cities, such as Sydney and Melbourne, display different characteristics comparing to other cities in Australia (Cho et al. 2021).