Do I need my Record of Employment?
 It is easier to apply for EI if you have your Record of
 Employment (ROE). You will need an ROE for every employer
 you worked for in the past 12 months.
 If your employer sends your ROE to the government online:
 ● they do not have to give you a copy, and
 ● you do not need a copy to apply for EI.
 But you can get a copy from Service Canada if you want one.
 You need a My Service Canada account to see your ROE online.
 Access your account or set one up at servicecanada.ca.
 It is easier to apply for EI with your ROE. But you should apply
 for EI right away, even if you do not have your ROE yet. You
 will need proof of your employment, such as pay stubs and
 T4 slips.
 Employment Insurance | 5
 If you do not apply within 4 weeks after your employment
 ends, you will probably get fewer EI payments.
 If you are having problems getting your ROE, call the
 Employment Insurance Telephone Information Service at
 1-800-206-7218. For TTY, call 1-800-529-3742.
 CLEO has a tool that creates a letter you can send to your
 employer asking for your ROE. Go to stepstojustice.ca/
 asking-for-roe.
 ❚❚❚ Can I get EI if I quit my job?
 If you quit your job, you will not qualify for regular EI benefits
 unless you had “just cause”. This means that you had to quit
 because you had no other reasonable choice.
 If you do not return to work when you are called back after a
 layoff, Service Canada sees this as quitting your job.
 If you have a problem at work, it helps to show that you tried
 to fix it. If the problem is so serious that it cannot be fixed, you
 might qualify for EI if you quit.
 But you might want to start looking for another job before you
 quit. Keep a record of your job search.
 What if I had just cause for quitting?
 If you can prove that you had just cause for quitting your job,
 you can get EI. There are many situations that could be just
 cause for quitting. Here are some examples.
 6 | cleo.on.ca
 You were discriminated against for one of the following
 reasons:
 ● your race, colour, national or ethnic origin, or religion
 ● your sexual orientation or your sex, which includes
 discrimination because of pregnancy or childbirth
 ● your marital status or family status
 ● your disability or age
 ● you were convicted of a crime but have a pardon or
 record suspension
 ● you belong to a union
 Your employer or supervisor:
 ● refused to pay you for overtime work, or forced you to
 work too much overtime
 ● was unfair or hostile to you for no good reason
 ● was doing something that was against the law
 ● pressured you to leave your job
 Or you quit your job because your employer:
 ● expected you to work in dangerous conditions
 ● cut your wages significantly or made major changes to
 your duties
 Even if one of the examples applies to you, that might not be
 enough to be just cause. And there could be other reasons for
 leaving that Service Canada will see as just cause.
 It is best to get legal advice before you quit your job for any
 reason. See page 27 to find out where to get legal help.
 Employment Insurance | 7
 ❚❚❚ Can I get EI if I was fired?
 It depends on why you were fired. If Service Canada says
 you were fired because of “misconduct”, they will not give
 you benefits.
 Misconduct usually means doing something wrong on
 purpose. Misconduct is more than not being able to do the
 job well. Here are some examples that could be misconduct:
 ● threatening someone or being violent
 ● destroying company property on purpose
 ● being away from work without permission
 ● not obeying an order from your employer
 It is often unclear if what a worker does is misconduct.
 Service Canada decides if you were fired for misconduct, not
 your employer. So you should apply, even if you were fired.
 ❚❚❚ If I quit or was fired, what happens when I
 apply for EI?
 When you apply, you have to answer questions on a special
 form if you quit or were fired.
 If you quit, you have to say:
 ● why you quit
 ● if you tried to fix the problem at work before you left
 ● if you tried to get other work before you quit
 8 | cleo.on.ca
 If you were fired, you have to say:
 ● why you were fired
 ● if your employer gave you any warnings
 ● if you tried to fix the problem
 Once you have filled in the form, Service Canada may
 interview you. They may also contact your employer. Then
 they decide if you quit without having just cause or were fired
 for misconduct.
 Being disqualified
 Service Canada could decide that you:
 ● quit without having just cause, or
 ● were fired for misconduct.
 If this happens, they will tell you in a letter that you cannot get
 regular EI benefits. This is called being “disqualified”.
 The letter will also tell you that you have the right to ask them
 to reconsider their decision. This means asking them to review
 and change their decision.
 You must ask for this in writing within 30 days of finding out
 about Service Canada’s decision. For more information, see
 page 25.
 Even if you cannot get regular EI benefits, you might still be
 able to get the special benefits that are listed