         International Journal of
         Molecular Sciences

Review
Fibromyalgia: Recent Advances in Diagnosis,
Classification, Pharmacotherapy and
Alternative Remedies
Massimo E. Ma↵ei
 Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, 10135 Turin, Italy;
 massimo.ma↵eil@unito.it; Tel.: +39-011-670-5967
                                                                                                  !"#!$%&'(!
 Received: 6 October 2020; Accepted: 22 October 2020; Published: 23 October 2020                  !"#$%&'


 Abstract: Fibromyalgia (FM) is a syndrome that does not present a well-defined underlying
 organic disease. FM is a condition which has been associated with diseases such as infections,
 diabetes, psychiatric or neurological disorders, rheumatic pathologies, and is a disorder that rather
 than diagnosis of exclusion requires positive diagnosis. A multidimensional approach is required for
 the management of FM, including pain management, pharmacological therapies, behavioral therapy,
 patient education, and exercise. The purpose of this review is to summarize the recent advances in
 classification criteria and diagnostic criteria for FM as well as to explore pharmacotherapy and the
 use of alternative therapies including the use of plant bioactive molecules.

 Keywords: fibromyalgia; diagnosis; pharmacotherapy; alternative therapies; plant extracts;
 natural products




1. Introduction
     Fibromyalgia (FM) (earlier considered to be fibrositis, to stress the role of peripheral inflammation
in the pathogenesis) is a syndrome that does not present a well-defined underlying organic disease.
The primary driver of FM is sensitization, which includes central sensitivity syndromes generally
referred to joint sti↵ness, chronic pain at multiple tender points, and systemic symptoms including
cognitive dysfunction, sleep disturbances, anxiety, fatigue, and depressive episodes [1,2]. FM is a
heterogeneous condition that is often associated to specific diseases such as infections, psychiatric or
neurological disorders, diabetes and rheumatic pathologies. FM is more frequent in females, where it
causes musculoskeletal pain [3] and a↵ects significantly the quality of life, often requiring an unexpected
healthcare e↵ort and consistent social costs [4,5]. Usually, a patient-tailored approach requires a
pharmacological treatment by considering the risk-benefit ratio of any medication. Being the third most
common diagnosis in rheumatology clinics, FM prevalence within the general population appears to
range from 1.3–8% [2]. To date there are no specific tests specific for FM. FM is currently recognized by
the widespread pain index (which divides the body into 19 regions and scores how many regions are
reported as painful) and a symptom severity score (SSS) that assesses cognitive symptoms, unrefreshing
sleep and severity of fatigue [6]. It is not clear what causes FM and diagnosing assist the patients to
face polysymptomatic distress, thereby reducing doubt and fear which are main psychological factors
contributing to this central amplification mechanism [7]. In this review, an update on diagnosis and
therapy of FM is provided along the discussion on the possibility of using pharmacological drugs,
bioactive natural substances and alternative therapies to alleviate the symptomatology in combination
or as alternative remedies to drugs.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                      2 of 27



2. Diagnosis
       To date there is still a considerable controversy on the assessment and diagnosis of FM. Despite
advances in the understanding of the pathologic process, FM remains undiagnosed in as many as 75%
of people with the condition [8].
       The first attempt for the FM classification criteria is dated 1990 and is based on studies
performed in 16 centers in the U.S.A. and Canada in clinical and academic settings, gathering
the both doubters and proponents [9]. Since then, several alternative methods of diagnosis
have been proposed.             In general, most of the researchers agree on the need to assess
multiple domains in FM including pain, sleep, mood, functional status, fatigue, problems with
concentration/memory (i.e. dyscognition) and tenderness/sti↵ness [5]. Four core areas were
initially assessed: (1) pain intensity, (2) physical functioning, (3) emotional functioning,
and (4) overall improvement/well-being [10]. About 70–80% of patients with FM also report having
sleep disturbances and fatigue. Depressive symptoms, anxiety and mood states have also been
included in FM diagnosis. An impairment in multiple areas of function, especially physical function
is often reported by patients with FM [11] with a markedly impaired function and quality of life [8].
Since the late 19900 s, a top priority was the development of new disease-specific measures for each
of the relevant domains in FM. Also, much attention was paid to studies supporting the valid use of
existing instruments specifically in the context of FM [5].
       Later on, in 2010, the tender point count was abandoned and the American College of
Rheumatology (ACR) suggested preliminary diagnostic criteria which were considering the number of
painful body regions evaluating the presence and severity of fatigue, cognitive difficulty, unrefreshed
sleep and the extent of somatic symptoms. The diagnostic criteria are not based on laboratory or
radiologic testing to diagnose FM and rely on a 0–12 Symptom Severity Scale (SSS) which is used to
quantify FM-type symptom severity [12]. Furthermore, the SSS was proposed to be combined with
the Widespread Pain Index (WPI) into a 0–31 Fibromyalgianess Scale (FS) [13]. With a specificity
of 96.6% and sensitivity of 91.8%, a score 13 for FS was able to correctly classify 93% of patients
identified as having FM based on the 1990 criteria [14]. ACR 2010 criteria were also found to be
more sensitive than the ACR 1990 criteria, allowing underdiagnosed FM patients to be correctly
identified and giving a treatment opportunity to those who had previously been untreated [15]. It is
still unclear whether the diagnosis of FM has the same meaning with respect to severity in primary FM
(PFM, a dominant disorder that occurs in the absence of another clinically important and dominant
pain disorder) and secondary FM (SFM, which occurs in the presence of another clinically important
and dominant medical disorder) [16]. Figure 1 shows the ACR 1990 criteria for the classification of
fibromyalgia, whereas Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of the Symptom Severity Scale (SSS)
plus the Extent of Somatic Symptoms (ESS).




      Figure 1. Widespread Pain Index from ACR 1990 criteria for the classification of fibromyalgia and
      related regions.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                    3 of 27




                    Figure 2. Symptom Severity scale (SSS) and Extent of Somatic Symptoms (ESS).

      Table 1 shows a holist approach based on the assumption that a multitude of potential diagnoses
is fundamental in order to avoid an FM misdiagnosis [17].
      In 2013, alternative diagnostic criteria have been developed by some clinicians in the USA
including more pain locations and a large range of symptoms than ACR 2010. A self-reported survey
was composed of the 28-area pain location inventory and the 10 symptom items from the Symptom
Impact Questionnaire (SIQ) [18]. However, when compared to the early 2010 criteria, these alternative
criteria did not significantly contribute in di↵erentiating common chronic pain disorders from FM [1].
      In 2015, the view of diagnostic criteria was altered by ACR by providing approval only for
classification criteria and no longer considering endorsement of diagnostic criteria, stressing that
diagnostic criteria are di↵erent from classification criteria and are beyond the remit of the ACR [19].
However, the suggestion that diagnostic and classification criteria represent 2 ends of a continuum
implies that the continuum represents the accuracy of the criteria [20]. Classification criteria
and diagnostic criteria could intersect; however, according to some authors the terms “diagnosis”
and “classification criteria” should be considered as qualitatively distinct concepts. The proposed
concept of “diagnostic criteria” [19] is challenging and may be hardly realizable, while diagnostic
guidelines based on proper modelling techniques may be helpful for clinicians in particular settings [20].
      In 2016, based on a generalized pain criterion and clinic usage data, a new revision of the 2010/2011
FM criteria was developed including the following criteria: 1) generalized pain, defined as pain present
in at least 4 of 5 regions; 2) symptoms present at a similar level for at least three months; 3) a WPI 7
and SSS 5 or WPI of 4–6 and SSS 9; 4) a diagnosis of FM is valid irrespective of other diagnoses.
Another important point is that the presence of other clinically important illnesses does not exclude a
diagnosis of FM [21].
      In 2018, considering important but less visible factors that have a profound influence on under-
or over-diagnosis of FM provided a new gate to a holistic and real understanding of FM diagnosis,
beyond existing arbitrary and constructional scores [22].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                                                                                                   4 of 27



                                                           Table 1. ACR2010 and modified criteria for the diagnosis of fibromyalgia.

                                                                                    Widespread pain index (WPI)
                                   Areas                                                                                   specification
        Number of areas in which the patient has had
                                                                                                                           0–19 points
                 pain over the past week
                                                              shoulder girdle, hip (buttock, trochanter), jaw, upper back, lower back, upper arm, upper leg, chest, neck, abdomen, lower arm,
                      Areas to be considered
                                                                                                and lower leg (all these areas should be considered bilaterally)
                                                                                 Symptom Severity Scale (SSS) score
                              Symptom                                     Level of severity                               Symptom level                                    Score
                                                              For each of these 3 symptoms, indicate
                                                              the level of severity over the past week
                                                                                                                Considering somatic symptoms in
                                                                      using the following scale:
                             Fatigue                                                                         general, indicate whether the patient has
                                                                            0 = no problem
                      Waking unrefreshed                                                                                   the following:
                                                               1 = slight or mild problems, generally
         Cognitive symptoms (e.g., working memory                                                                        0 = no symptoms                        Final score between 0 and 12
                                                                          mild or intermittent
       capacity, recognition memory, verbal knowledge,                                                                  1 = few symptoms
                                                               2 = moderate; considerable problems,
                    anxiety, and depression)                                                                  2 = a moderate number of symptoms
                                                              often present and/or at a moderate level
                                                                                                                  3 = a great deal of symptoms
                                                                 3 = severe; pervasive, continuous,
                                                                       life-disturbing problems
                                                                                                  Criteria
                            Specification                                                                                   Conditions
             A patient satisfies diagnostic criteria for                                     (a)WPI 7/19 and SS scale score 5 or WPI 3–6 and SS scale score 9
            fibromyalgia if the following 3 conditions                                      (b) symptoms have been present as a similar level for at least 3 months
                              are met                                                  (c) the patient does not have a disorder that would otherwise explain the pain
                                                                                              Modified criteria
                            Specification                                    Conditions                                                           Final Score
                                                                          (a)WPI (as above)
             A patient satisfies diagnostic criteria for      (b) SS scale score (as above, but without
                                                                                                              The number of pain sites (WPI), the SS scale score, and the presence of associated
            fibromyalgia if the following 3 conditions               extent of somatic symptoms)
                                                                                                                      symptoms are summed to give a final score between 0 and 31
                              are met                              (c) presence of abdominal pain,
                                                               depression, headaches (yes = 1, no = 0)
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                     5 of 27



     In 2019, in cooperation with the WHO, an IASP Working Group has developed a classification
system included in the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11) where FM has been classified
as chronic primary pain, to distinguish it from pain which is secondary to an underlying disease [23].
     More recently, a study of about 500 patients under diagnosis of FM, revealed that 24.3% satisfied
the FM criteria, while 20.9% received a clinician International Classification of Diseases (ICD) diagnosis
of FM, with a 79.2% agreement between clinicians and criteria. The conclusions of this study pointed
out a disagreement between ICD clinical diagnosis and criteria-based diagnosis of FM, calling into
question meaning of a FM diagnosis, the validity of physician diagnosis and clinician bias [24].
     FM is a disorder that cannot be based on diagnosis of exclusion, rather needing positive
diagnosis [6], through a multidimensional FM diagnostic approach making diagnosis encompassing
psychosocial stressors, subjective belief, psychological factors and somatic complaints [25]. The advent
of the PSD scale identified a number of problems in FM research [16].
     Recently, immunophenotyping analysis performed on blood samples of FM patients revealed a
role of the Mu opioid receptor on B lymphocytes as a specific biomarker for FM [26]. Moreover, a rapid
biomarker-based method for diagnosing FM has been developed by using vibrational spectroscopy
to di↵erentiate patients with FM from those with other pain-related diseases. Unique IR and Raman
spectral signatures were correlated with FM pain severity measured with FM impact questionnaire
revised version (FIQR) [27]. Overall, these findings provide reliable diagnostic tests for di↵erentiating
FM from other disorders, for establishing serologic biomarkers of FM-associated pain and were useful
for the contribution of the legitimacy of FM as a truly painful disease.
     In summarizing aspects of FM learned through applications of criteria to patients and trials,
Wolfe [28] identified 7 main concepts: 1) there is no way of objectively testing FM which also has no
binding definition; 2) prevalence and acceptance of FM depend on factors largely external to the patient;
3) FM is a continuum and not a categorical disorder; 4) every feeling, symptom, physical finding,
neuroscience measure, cost and outcome tells one very little about the disorder and its mechanisms
when fibromyalgia to “normal subjects” is compared; 5) the range and content of symptoms might
indicate that FM may not truly be a syndrome; 6) “pain and distress” type of FM subject identified in
the general population [29] might be considered as part of the FM definition and; 7) caution is needed
when accepting the current reductive neurobiological causal explanations as sufficient, since FM is a
socially constructed and arbitrarily defined and diagnosed dimensional disorder.

3. Therapy

3.1. Pharmacotherapy of FM
     Clinical trials have failed to conclusively provide overall benefits of specific therapies to treat FM;
therefore, current pharmacological treatments for patients su↵ering from FM are mainly directed to
palliate some symptoms, with relevant clinical benefits experienced only by a minority of individuals
from any one intervention. In those treated with pharmacotherapy, a 50%reduction in pain intensity is
generally achieved only by 10% to 25% [30] However, some treatments seem to significantly improve
the quality of life of certain FM patients [31]. Only a few drugs have been approved for use in the
treatment of FM by the US FDA, whereas no drug has been approved for this indication by the European
Medicines Agency. Thus patients with FM frequently need to be treated on an o↵-label basis [32].
     Currently, only 25% to 40% pain reduction is granted by drugs and meaningful relief occurs
in only 40% to 60%, in part due to dose-limiting adverse e↵ects and incomplete drug efficacy [33].
These limitations in clinical practice have led some to hypothesize that a combination of di↵erent
analgesic drugs acting through di↵erent mechanisms may provide superior outcomes compared to
monotherapy [34]. Moreover, drugs should be started at low doses and cautiously increased because
some patients, either do not tolerate or benefit from drug therapy. Because sleep disturbance, pain and
psychological distress are the most amenable to drug therapy, drugs should be chosen to manage
the individual’s predominant symptoms [35]. Currently, several drugs are frequently used alone
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                    6 of 27



or in combination to manage FM symptoms; however, the US FDA indicated for FM only three:
two selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), duloxetine and milnacipran,
and an anticonvulsant, pregabalin [36]. In the next sections, the use of selected drugs aimed to alleviate
FM will be described.

3.1.1. Cannabinoids in FM Therapy
      The cannabinoid system is ubiquitous in the animal kingdom and plays multiple functions with
stabilizing e↵ects for the organism, including modulation of pain and stress, and the management of
FM may have therapeutic potential by manipulating this system. The cannabinoid system contributes
in maintaining equilibrium and stabilizing e↵ects on FM [37]. Moreover, the endocannabinoid
neuromodulatory system is involved in multiple physiological functions, such as inflammation
and immune recognition, endocrine function, cognition and memory, nausea, antinociception and
vomiting, [38]. Deficiency in the endocannabinoid system has been correlated to FM [39], but without
clear clinical evidence in support of this assumption [40].
      The endocannabinoid system consists of two cannabinoid receptors, the CB1 and CB2
receptors [41]. In acute and chronic pain models, analgesic e↵ects are associated to CB1
agonists that act at many sites along pain transmission pathways, including activation of spinal,
supraspinal and peripheral CB1 receptors, each independently decreasing nociception [42]. Delta
9-tetrahydrocannabinol (D9-THC or Dronabinol, 1) is the main active constituent of Cannabis sativa var
indica, with psychoactive and pain-relieving properties. The non-selective binding to G-protein-coupled
CB receptors is responsible for the pharmacological e↵ects induced by D9-THC. Cannabidiol (CBD,
2), a non-psychotropic constituent of cannabis, is a high potency antagonist of CB receptor agonists
and an inverse agonist at the CB2 receptor [43]. CBD displays CB2 receptor inverse agonism,
an action that appears to be responsible for its antagonism of CP55940 at the human CB2 receptor [44].
This CB2 receptor inverse agonist ability of CBD may contribute to its documented anti-inflammatory
properties [44]. The main endocannabinoids are anandamide (N-arachidonoylethanolamine, AEA, 3)
and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG, 4), AG), the activity of which is modulated by the hydrolyzing fatty
acid palmitoylethanolamide (PEA, 5) and the endocannabinoid precursor arachidonic acid (AA, 6) [45].
AEA and 2-AG are functionally related to D9-THC [46]. It was found that stress induces a rapid
anandamide release in several CNS regions resulting in stress-induced analgesia via CB1 receptors [47].
FM patients had significantly higher anandamide plasma levels [39,46]; however, it has been suggested
that the origin of FM and chronic pain depend on a deficiency in the endocannabinoid signaling [45].
      Monotherapies of FM based on D9-THC are based on the assumption that this compound acts as
an analgesic drug; however, although a sub-population of FM patients reported significant benefits
from the use of D9-THC, this statement cannot be made [48]. When the quality of life of FM patients
who consumed cannabis was compared with FM subjects who were not cannabis users, a significant
improvement of symptoms of FM in patients using cannabis was observed, although there was a
variability of patterns [49].
      The synthetic cannabinoid nabilone (7) showed of a superiority over placebo to reduce FM
symptoms, with significant reductions in Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for pain, FM Impact Questionnaire
(FIQ), and anxiety [42], indicating the efficacy of treating people with FM with nabilone. Nabilone was
also e↵ective in improving sleep [50]; however, participants taking nabilone experienced more adverse
events (such as dizziness/drowsiness, dry mouth and vertigo) than did participants taking placebo or
amitriptyline (see below).
      The self-medication practice of herbal cannabis was associated with negative psychosocial
parameters. Therefore, caution should be exercised in recommending the use of cannabinoids pending
clarification of general health and psychosocial problems [51,52]. Figure 3 illustrates the chemical
formulas of some cannabinoids and endocannabinoids.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                   7 of 27




      Figure 3. Structure formulae of some cannabinoids and related compounds. Numbers correspond to
      compound names cited in the text.

3.1.2. Opioids in FM Therapy
     One of the major natural sources of opioids is the medicinal plant Papaver somniferum.
Although clinical evidence demonstrating the efficacy or e↵ectiveness of opioids analgesics is scanty,
these molecules are widely used for the treatment of FM [53]. However, the long-term use of opioids
in FM has been discouraged by several medical guidelines [54]. The use of opioids is documented in
studies demonstrating increased endogenous opioid levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with
FM vs. controls [55]. These results prompted the interesting hypothesis that a more activated opioid
system can be detected in individuals with FM, reflecting reduced receptor availability and increased
release of endogenous opioids [54].
     There is evidence from both single center, prospective, longitudinal and multicenter and
observational clinical studies of negative e↵ects of the use of opioids in FM on patient outcomes
compared with other therapies [56,57]. Moreover, opioid user groups showed less improvement in
the SFM-36 subscale scores of general health perception and in the FIQ subscale scores of job ability,
fatigue and physical impairment [58]. Furthermore, altered endogenous opioid analgesic activity in
FM has been demonstrated and suggested as a possible reason for why exogenous opiates appear to
have reduced efficacy [59]. Despite these facts, opioids have been prescribed for 10% to 60% of patients
with FM as reported in large database sets [54].
     When considered, the preference of patients appears towards opioids. In a survey, 75% of patients
considered hydrocodone (8) plus acetaminophen to be helpful, and 67% considered oxycodone (9) plus
acetaminophen to be helpful [60]. FM has been associated with preoperative opioid use, including
hydrocodone [61], whereas there is limited information from randomized controlled trials on the
benefits or harms of oxycodone when used to treat pain in FM [62].
     A pilot study showed that naltrexone (10) reduced self-reported symptoms of FM (primarily
daily pain and fatigue) [63] and further studies showed that low-dose naltrexone had a specific
and clinically beneficial impact on FM. This opioid, which is widely available and inexpensive,
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                      8 of 27



was found to be safe and well-tolerated. Blocking peripheral opioid receptors with naloxone (11)
was observed to prevent acute and chronic training-induced analgesia in a rat model of FM [64];
however, there were no significant e↵ects of naloxone nor nocebo on pressure pain threshold,
deep tissue pain, temporal summation or conditioned pain modulation in chronic fatigue syndrome/FM
patients [65].
      A synthetic opioid receptor agonist that shows serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor
properties is tramadol (12); this compound is often prescribed for painful conditions [66].
Tramadol has been studied in humans who su↵er from FM [56], suggesting that tramadol may
be e↵ective in treating FM [67]. The use of tramadol provides change in pain assessed by
visual analogue scale and FM impact questionnaire; however, the reported side e↵ects include
dizziness, headache, constipation, addiction, withdrawal, nausea, serotonin syndrome, somnolence,
pruritus seizures, drug–drug interactions with antimigraine and antidepressants medications [66].
Therefore, it is recommended that tramadol application should be considered in refractory and more
treatment-resistant cases of FM.
      Another weak opioid is codeine (13). In a comparative study, there was a significantly higher
proportion of patients in the codeine-acetaminophen group reporting somnolence or constipation
and a larger proportion of patients in the tramadol-acetaminophen group reporting headache.
The overall results suggested that tramadol-acetaminophen tablets (37.5 mg/325 mg) were as e↵ective
as codeine-acetaminophen capsules (30 mg/300 mg) in the treatment of chronic pain [68].
      Fentanyl (14) works primarily by activating µ-opioid receptors and was found to be around 100
times stronger than morphine (15), although its e↵ects are more localized. Fentanyl injections reduced
second pain from repeated heat taps in FM patients. Similar to reports of e↵ects of morphine on first
and second pain, fentanyl had larger inhibitory e↵ects on slow temporal summation of second pain
than on first pain from a nociceptor stimulation [69]. Since fentanyl can inhibit windup of second pain
in FM patients, it can prevent the occurrence of intense summated second pain and thereby reduce its
intensity by a greater extent than first or second pains evoked by single stimuli. Among the 70,237
drug-related deaths estimated in 2017 in the US, the sharpest increase occurred among those related
to fentanyl analogs with almost 29,000 overdose deaths which represents more than 45% increase
from 2016 to 2017 [70]. Because the numbers of overdoses and deaths due to fentanyl will continue to
increase in the coming years, studies are needed to elucidate the physiological mechanisms underlying
fentanyl overdose in order to develop e↵ective treatments aimed to reduce the risk of death [71].
      Glial cell activation is one of the several other possible pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying
the development of FM by contributing to central nervous system sensitization to nociceptive
stimuli [72]. Pentoxifylline (16), a xanthine derivative used as a drug to treat muscle pain in people
with peripheral artery disease, is a nonspecific cytokine inhibitor that has been shown to attenuate glial
cell activation and to inhibit the synthesis of TNF↵, IL-1 , and IL-6 [73]. In theory, attenuating glial cell
activation via the administration of pentoxifylline to individuals su↵ering from FM might be efficient
in ameliorating their symptoms without being a globalist therapeutic approach targeting all possible
pathophysiologic mechanisms of development of the syndrome [74]. With regards FM pathophysiology,
serum brain-derived neurotrophic factors (BDNF) were found at higher levels in FM patients while
BDNF methylation in exon 9 accounted for the regulation of protein expression. These data suggest
that altered BDNF levels might represent a key mechanism explaining FM pathophysiology [75].
      Opioid users were also observed to experience a decreased pain and symptom severity when
ca↵eine (17) was consumed, but this was not observed in opioid nonusers, indicating ca↵eine may act
as an opioid adjuvant in FM-like chronic pain patients. Therefore the consumption of ca↵eine along
with the use of opioid analgesics could represent an alternative therapy with respect to opioids or
ca↵eine alone [76]. Figure 4 shows the chemical formulae of some opioids used in FM therapy.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                   9 of 27




      Figure 4. Structure formulae of some opioids and related compounds. Numbers correspond to
      molecules cited in the text.

3.1.3. Gabapentinoids in FM Therapy
      Gabapentinoid drugs are US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (but not in Europe)
anticonvulsants approved for treatment of pain syndromes, including FM. However, FDA approved
pregabalin (18) but not gabapentin (19) for FM treatment; nevertheless, gabapentin is often prescribed
o↵-label for FM, presumably because it is substantially less expensive [77]. Pregabalin is a
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) analog and is a ligand for the ↵2 subunit of the calcium channel
being able of reducing the ability of docked vesicles to fuse and release neurotransmitters [78].
Pregabalin shows e↵ects on cortical neural networks, particularly when basal neurons are under
hyperexcitability. The pain measures and pregabalin impact on the cortical excitability was
observed only in FM patients [79]. Pregabalin was also found to increase norepinephrine levels
in reserpine-induced myalgia rats [80]. Because of its tolerability when used in combination with
antidepressants, pregabalin use showed a very good benefit to risk ratio [81]. The starting approved
dosage for pregabalin is at 150 mg daily [82]; however, the drug shows a higher e↵ectiveness when
used at a dose of 300 or 600 mg/day. Lower pregabalin doses than those of clinical trials are used in
clinical practice because higher doses are more likely to be intolerable [83]. A recent systematic review
shows that a minority of people with moderate to severe pain due to FM treated with a daily dose of
300 to 600 mg of pregabalin had a reduction of pain intensity over a follow-up period of 12 to 26 weeks,
with tolerable adverse e↵ects [84]. Thus, pregabalin is one of cardinal drugs used in the treatment of
FM, and its clinical utility has been comprehensively demonstrated [85,86]. Nevertheless, there is still
insufficient evidence to support or refute that gabapentin may reduce pain in FM [87]. Figure 5 depicts
the chemical formulae of some gabapentinoids.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                       10 of 27




      Figure 5. Structure formulae of some gabapentinoids. Numbers correspond to molecules cited in the text.

3.1.4. Serotonin–Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors in FM Therapy
       There is a wide use of serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). There is no
unbiased evidence that serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are superior to placebo in treating
depression in people with FM and for treating the key symptoms of FM, namely sleep problems,
fatigue and pain. However, it should be considered that young adults aged 18 to 24, with major
depressive disorder, showed an increased suicidal tendency when treated with SSRIs [88]. A recent
Cochrane review evaluated the use of SNRIs including eighteen studies with a total of 7,903 adults
diagnosed with FM, by using desvenlafaxine (20) and venlafaxine (21) in addition to duloxetine (22)
and milnacipran (23), by considering various outcomes for SNRIs including health related quality of
life, fatigue, sleep problems, pain and patient general impression, as well as safety and tolerability [89].
Fifty two percent of those receiving duloxetine and milnacipran had a clinically relevant benefit
over placebo compared to 29% of those on placebo, with much or very much improvements in the
intervention. On the other hand, reduction of pain intensity was not significantly di↵erent from
placebo when desvenlafaxine was used. However, pain relief and reduction of fatigue was not clinically
relevant for duloxetine and milnacipran in 50% or greater and did not improve the quality of life [90].
Same negative outcomes were found for reducing problems in sleep and the potential general benefits
of duloxetine and milnacipran were outweighed by their potential harms.
       The efficacy of venlafaxine in the treatment of FM was studied to a lesser extent. The lack of
consistency in venlafaxine dosing, placebo control and blinding make difficult to understand whether
the molecule is e↵ective in treating FM. Nevertheless, tolerability and the lower cost of venlafaxine
increases its potential use for the treatment of FM, by rendering the molecule a more a↵ordable option
compared to the other, more expensive SNRIs [91].
       Mirtazapine (24) promotes the release of noradrenaline and serotonin by blocking ↵2 -adrenergic
autoreceptors and ↵2 -adrenergic heteroreceptors, respectively. Mirtazapine, by acting through 5-HT1A
receptors and by blocking postsynaptic 5-HT2A , 5-HT2C , and 5-HT3 receptors is able to enhance
serotonin neurotransmission [92]. For these properties, mirtazapine is classified as a noradrenergic and
specific serotonergic antidepressant [93]. Mirtazapine appears to be a promising therapy to improve
sleep, pain, and quality of life in patients with FM [94]. In Japanese patients with FM, mirtazapine caused
a significantly greater reduction in the mean numerical rating scale pain score and remained significantly
greater from week 6 onward, compared with placebo. However, Adverse mirtazapine caused adverse
events including weight gain, somnolence and increased appetite when compared to placebo [92].
       Among antidepressants, the tricyclic antidepressant (TCAs) amitriptyline (25) was studied more
than other antidepressants. It is frequently used to assess comparative efficacy [95] and for many
years amitriptyline has been a first-line treatment for FM. Although there is no supportive unbiased
evidence for a beneficial e↵ect, the drug was successful for the treatment in many patients with
FM. However, amitriptyline achieve satisfactory pain relief only by a minority of FM patients and is
unlikely that any large randomized trials of amitriptyline will be conducted in FM to establish efficacy
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                        11 of 27



statistically, or measure the size of the e↵ect [96]. Figure 6 depicts the chemical formulae of some SNRIs
and TCA.




      Figure 6. Chemical structure of some serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors and a tricyclic
      antidepressant. Numbers correspond to molecules cited in the text.

3.2. Alternative Therapies for FM
      A survey of the European guidelines shows that most of the pharmacological therapies are
relatively modest providing only weak recommendations for FM [97]. A multidimensional approach
is therefore required for the management of FM, including pharmacological therapies along with
behavioral therapy, exercise, patient education and pain management. A multidisciplinary approach
combines pharmacotherapy with physical or cognitive interventions and natural remedies. Very often,
patients seek help in alternative therapies due to the limited efficacy of the therapeutic options.
The following sections discuss some of the most used alternative therapies to treat FM.

3.2.1. Acupunture
     Acupuncture shows low to moderate-level in improving pain and sti↵ness in people with FM.
In some cases, acupuncture does not di↵er from sham acupuncture in improving sleep or global
well-being or reducing pain or fatigue. The mechanisms of acupuncture action in FM treatment
appears to be correlated to changes in serum serotonin levels [98]. Electro-acupuncture (EA) was more
e↵ective than manual acupuncture (MA) for improving sleep, global well-being and fatigue and in the
reduction of pain and sti↵ness. Although e↵ective, the e↵ect of acupuncture is not maintained at six
months follow-up [99]. Moreover, there is a lack of evidence that real acupuncture significantly di↵ers
from sham acupuncture with respect to improving the quality of life, both in the short and long term.
However, acupuncture therapy is a safe treatment for patients with FM [100,101].

3.2.2. Electric Stimulation
      As we discussed, FM, aside pain, is characterized by anxiety, depression and sleep disturbances,
and by a complex cognitive dysfunctioning status known as “fibrofog” which is characterized by
disturbance in working memory, attention and executive functions globally often referred by the
patients as a sense of slowing down, clumsiness and confusion that have a profound impact on the
ability to perform and e↵ectively plan daily activities [102,103]. Besides stimulation with acupuncture,
the e↵ective modulation of brain areas has been obtained through non-invasive brain stimulation by
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                  12 of 27



magnetic or electric currents applied to the scalp like transcranial magnetic and electrical stimulation.
In many cases, to relieve pain and improve general FM-related function, the use of anodal transcranial
direct current stimulation over the primary motor cortex was found to be significantly more e↵ective
than sham transcranial direct current stimulation [104]. If we consider that pharmacological and
non-pharmacological treatments are often ine↵ective or transitory in their e↵ect on FM, therapeutic
electrical stimulation appears to have a potential role [105]. Cognitive functions such as memory have
been enhanced in FM patients by anodal transcranial direct current stimulation over the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex and has clinical relevance for top-down treatment approaches in FM [106]. In FM
patients, modulation of hemodynamic responses by transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation during
delivery of nociceptive stimulation was also investigated and shown to be an e↵ective factor in FM
treatment, although the underlying mechanism for these findings still needs to be clarified [107]. It has
been recently demonstrated that both transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation and acupuncture
applications seem to be beneficial in FM patients [108].
     In a recent Positron Emission Tomography H2 15 O activation study it was shown that occipital
nerve field stimulation acts through activation of the descending pain inhibitory pathway and the
lateral pain pathway in FM, while electroencephalogram shows activation of those cortical areas that
could be responsible for descending inhibition system recruitment [109].
     Microcirculation is of great concern in patients with FM. Recently low-energy pulsed
electromagnetic field therapy was found to increase a promising therapy to increase
microcirlulation [110]; however, neither pain and sti↵ness were reduced nor functioning was improved
by this therapy in women with FM [111].
     The European Academy of Neurology, based on the method of GRADE (Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) judged anodal transcranial
direct currents stimulation of motor cortex as still inconclusive for treatment of FM [112].
Therefore, further studies are needed to determine optimal treatment protocols and to elucidate
the mechanisms involved [113].

3.2.3. Vibroacoustic and Rhythmic Sensory Stimulation
      Stimulation with sensory events such as pulsed or continuous auditory, vibrotactile and visual
flickering stimuli are referred as rhythmic sensory stimulation [114].
      Clinical studies have reported the application of vibroacoustic stimulation in the treatment of
FM. In a clinal study, one group of patients with FM listened to a sequence of Bach’s compositions,
another was subjected to vibratory stimuli on a combination of acupuncture points on the skin and a
third group received no stimulation. The results showed that a greater e↵ect on FM symptoms was
achieved by the combined use of music and vibration [115]. However, in another study, neither music
nor musically fluctuating vibration had a significant e↵ect on tender point pain in FM patients when
compared to placebo treatment [116]. Because thalamocortical dysrhythmia is implicated in FM and
that low-frequency sound stimulation can play a regulatory function by driving neural rhythmic
oscillatory activity, volunteers with FM were subjected to 23 min of low-frequency sound stimulation
at 40 Hz, delivered using transducers in a supine position. Although no adverse e↵ects in patients
receiving the treatment, no statistically and clinically relevant improvement were observed [117].
On the other hand, gamma-frequency rhythmic vibroacoustic stimulation was found to decrease
FM symptoms (depression, sleep quality and pain interference) and ease associated comorbidities
(depression and sleep disturbances), opening new avenues for further investigation of the e↵ects of
rhythmic sensory stimulation on chronic pain conditions [118].

3.2.4. Thermal Therapies
    Thermal therapies have been used to treat FM. Two main therapies are currently used:
body warming and cryotherapy.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                   13 of 27



     Because FM is strongly linked to rheumatic aches, the application of heat by spa therapy
(balneotherapy) appears as a natural choice for the treatment of FM [119]. Spa therapy is a popular
treatment for FM in many European countries, as well as in Japan and Israel. A randomized prospective
study of a 10-day treatment was done on 48 FM patients improving their quality of life [120] and
showed that treatment of FM at the Dead Sea was both e↵ective and safe [121]. FM patients who were
poorly responding to pharmacological therapies were subjected to mud-bath treatment. A cycle of mud
bath applications showed beneficial e↵ects on FM patients whose evaluation parameters remained
stable after 16 weeks in comparison to baseline [122]. In patients su↵ering from FM, mud bathing
was also found to prevent muscle atrophy and inflammation and improve nutritional condition [123].
Nevertheless, despite positive results, the methodological limitations of available clinical studies,
such as the lack of placebo double-blinded trials, preclude definitive conclusions on the e↵ect of
body-warming therapies to treat FM [119,124].
     A remedy widely used in sports related trauma is the application of cold as a therapeutic agent
for pain relief. Cryotherapy refers to the use of low temperatures to decrease the inflammatory
reaction, including oedema [125]. Cryotherapy induces several organism physiological reactions like
increasing anti-inflammatory cytokines, beta-endorphins, ACTH, white blood cells, catecholamines and
cortisol, immunostimulation due to noradrenalin response to cold, the increase in the level of plasma
total antioxidant status and the reduction of pain through the alteration of nerve conduction [126].
When compared to control FM subjects, cryotherapy-treated FM patients reported a more pronounced
improvement of the quality of life [127]. Whole body cryotherapy was also found to be a useful
adjuvant therapy for FM [126].

3.2.5. Hyperbaric Treatment
      Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) has shown beneficial e↵ects for the prevention and treatment
of pain [128], including migraine, cluster headache [129] and FM [130]. HBOT is supposed to induce
neuroplasticity that leads to repair of chronically impaired brain functions. HBOT was also found
to it improve the quality of life in post-stroke patients and mild traumatic brain injury patients [131].
Therefore, the increased oxygen concentration caused by HBOT is supposed to change the brain
metabolism and glial function with a potential e↵ect on reducing the FM-associated brain abnormal
activity [132]. HBOT was found to a↵ect the mitochondrial mechanisms resulting in functional
brain changes, stimulate nitric oxide production thus alleviating hyperalgesia and promoting the
NO-dependent release of endogenous opioids which appear to be involved in the antinociception
prompted by HBOT [133]. In a clinical study, a significant di↵erence between the HBOT and control
groups was found in the reduction in tender points and VAS scores after the first and fifteenth therapy
sessions [130]. These results indicate that HBOT may play an important role in managing FM.

3.2.6. Laser Therapy and Phototherapy
      The use of di↵erent light wavelengths has been found to be an alternative therapy for FM. It is
known that low-level laser therapy is a therapeutic factor, being able not only to target one event in the
painful reception, but rather the extend its e↵ectiveness on the whole hierarchy of mechanisms of its
origin and regulation [134]. Laser photobiomodulation therapy has been reported to be e↵ective in the
treatment of a variety of myofascial musculoskeletal disorders, including FM [135]. The combination
of laser therapy and the administration of the drug amitriptyline was found to be e↵ective on clinical
symptoms and quality of life in FM; furthermore, gallium-arsenide laser therapy was found to be a
safe and e↵ective treatment which can be used as a monotherapy or as a supplementary treatment to
other therapeutic procedures in FM [136]. Evidence supported also the use of laser therapy in women
su↵ering FM to improve pain and upper body range of motion, ultimately reducing the impact of
FM [137,138]. Finally, a combination of phototherapy and exercise training was evaluated in patients
with FM in a randomized controlled trial for chronic pain to o↵er valuable clinical evidence for objective
assessment of the potential benefits and risks of procedures [139].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                     14 of 27



3.2.7. Exercise and Massage
     Exercise therapy seems to be an e↵ective component of treatment, yielding improvement in pain
and other symptoms, as well as decreasing the burden of FM on the quality of life [140]. Exercise is
generally acceptable by individuals with FM and was found to improve the ability to do daily activities
and the quality of life and to decrease tiredness and pain [141]. However, it is important to know the
e↵ects and specificities of di↵erent types of exercise. For instance, two or more types of exercise may
combine strengthening, aerobic or stretching exercise; however, there is no substantial evidence that
mixed exercise may improve sti↵ness [142]. Quality of life may be improved by muscle stretching
exercise, especially with regard to physical functioning and pain, whereas depression is reduced by
resistance training. A trial including a control group and two intervention groups, both of which
receiving exercise programs created specifically for patients with FM, showed that both modalities were
e↵ective in an exercise therapy program for FM [143]. A progressive muscle strengthening activity was
also found to be a safe and e↵ective mode of exercise for FM patients [144]. Furthermore, strength and
flexibility exercises in aerobic exercise rehabilitation for FM patients led to improvements in patients’
shoulder/hip range of motion and handgrip strength [145]. Among women with FM, the association
between physical activity and daily function is mediated by the intensity of musculoskeletal pain,
rather than depressive symptoms or body mass [146], with a link between clinical and experimental
pain relief after the performance of isometric contractions [147].
     A randomized controlled trial evaluated the e↵ects of yoga intervention on FM symptoms.
Women performing yoga showed a significant improvement on standardized measures of FM
symptoms and functioning, including fatigue, mood and pain, and in pain acceptance and other coping
strategies [148]. Moreover, the combination with massage therapy program during three months
influenced perceived stress index, cortisol concentrations, intensity of pain and quality of life of patients
with FM [149].
     In terms of societal costs and health care costs, quality of life and physical fitness in females with
FM was improved by aquatic training and subsequent detraining [150,151]. Aquatic physical training
was e↵ective in promoting increased oxygen uptake at peak cardiopulmonary exercise test in women
with FM [152]. A systematic evaluation of the harms and benefits of aquatic exercise training in adults
with FM showed that it may be beneficial for improving wellness, symptoms, and fitness in adults
with FM [153,154].
     A safe and clinically efficacious treatment of pain and other FM symptoms was also achieved by the
combination of osteopathic manipulative medicine and pharmacologic treatment with gabapentin [155].
     Dancing is a type of aerobic exercise that may be used in FM alternative therapy. Belly dancing
was found to be e↵ective in improving functional capacity, pain, quality of life and improving body
image of women with FM [156]. More recently, three months treatment of patients with FM with
Zumba dancing was found to be e↵ective in improving pain and physical functioning [157].
     Finally, Tai chi mind-body treatment was found to improve FM symptoms as much as aerobic
exercise and longer duration of Tai chi showed greater improvement. According to a recent report,
mind-body approaches may take part of the multidisciplinary management of FM and be considered
an alternative therapeutic option [158].

3.2.8. Probiotics and FM Therapy
     A tractable strategy for developing novel therapeutics for complex central nervous system disorders
could rely on the so called microbiota-gut-brain axis management, because intestinal homeostasis may
directly a↵ect brain functioning [159,160]. The pain intensity of patients with FM has been reported to
be correlated with the degree of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, which is often associated with
an increased intestinal permeability whose values were significantly increased in the FM patients [161].
Preclinical trials indicate that the microbiota and its metabolome are likely involved in modulating
brain processes and behaviors [162]. Therefore, FM patients should show better performance after
the treatment with probiotics. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized design probiotic
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                  15 of 27



improved impulsive choice and decision-making in FM patients, but no other e↵ects were observed on
cognition, quality of life, self-reported pain, FM impact, depressive or anxiety symptoms [163].

3.2.9. Use of Plant Extracts and Natural Products for FM Treatment
     About 40% of drugs used to treat FM originate from natural products [164]; however, there are a
few studies that prove the safe and e↵ective use of various plant extracts in FM therapy. Several plant
extracts are currently used for their antinociceptive properties and potential to treat FM [165].
     Papaver somniferum is probably the most ancient plant used for its antinociceptive properties [166],
with chemical components able to interact with opioid receptors; among these morphine (15) which is
not only the oldest, but is still the most e↵ective drug for the management of severe pain in clinical
practice [167]. The use of opioids for FM treatment has been discussed above.
     Another important plant is Cannabis sativa. The major active constituent of Cannabis, D9-THC (1),
has been shown to possess antinociceptive properties when assessed in several experimental
models [168] (see also the discussion above on cannabinoids). Although there is still scarce evidence to
support its role in the treatment of FM, a large consensus indicates that medical cannabis could be
an e↵ective alternative for the treatment of FM symptoms [169]. The illicit use of herbal cannabis for
FM treatment has been correlated to the inefficacy of current available medications, but is also linked
to popular advocacy or familiarity with marijuana from recreational use. Therefore, physicians are
requested to examine the global psychosocial well-being, and not focus only on the single outcome
measure of pain [52,170]. Although medical cannabis treatment has a significant favorable e↵ect
on patients with FM, 30% of patients experience adverse e↵ects [171] and 8% report dependence
on cannabis [172]. VAS scores measured in 28 FM patients after 2 hours of cannabis use showed
enhancement of relaxation and feeling of well-being, a reduction of pain and sti↵ness which were
accompanied by an increase in somnolence. The mental health component summary score of the Short
Form 36 Health Survey was higher in cannabis users than in non-users [49].
     Among terpenoids, administration of trans- -caryophyllene (BCP, 26), a bicyclic sesquiterpene
compound existing in the essential oil of many plants like Copaifera langsdforffii, Cananga odorata,
Humulus lupulus, Piper nigrum and Syzygium aromaticum, which provide a high percentage of BCP
along with interesting essential oil yields [173], significantly minimized the pain in both acute
and chronic pain models [174]. BCP selectively binds to the cannabinoid 2 (CB2 ) receptor and
is a functional CB2 agonist. Upon binding to the CB2 receptor, BCP inhibits adenylate cylcase,
leads to intracellular calcium transients and weakly activates the mitogen-activated kinases Erk1/2
and p38 in primary human monocytes [175]. BCP, a safe compound with toxicity at doses higher
than 2000 mg/kg body weight [176], was found to reduce the primary and secondary hyperalgesia
produced by a chronic muscle pain model (which is considered to be an animal model for FM) [177].
Significant and dose-dependent antinociceptive response was produced by BCP without the presence
of gastric damage [178]. Antiallodynic actions of BCP are exerted only through activation of local
peripheral CB2 [179]. In neuropathic pain models, BCP reduced spinal neuroinflammation and
the oral administration was more e↵ective than the subcutaneously injected synthetic CB2 agonist
JWH-133 [180]. Recently, BCP was found to exert an analgesic e↵ect in an FM animal model through
activation of the descending inhibitory pain pathway [181]. Thus, BCP may be highly e↵ective in the
treatment of long-lasting, debilitating pain states, suggesting the interesting application of BCP in
FM therapy.
     The analgesic properties of myrrh (Commiphora myrrha) have been known since ancient times
and depend on the presence of bioactive sesquiterpenes with furanodiene skeletons which are able
to interact with the opioid receptors [182,183]. C. myrrha extracts exerted a stronger suppression on
carrageenan-induced mice paw edema with significant analgesic e↵ects [184] and were e↵ective against
chronic inflammatory joint disease such as osteoarthritis [185]. In a preclinical trial, pain alleviation
was obtained with C. myrrha extracts for many pathologies [186], indicating that extracts from this
plant may have the potential to treat FM.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                       16 of 27



     Preclinical studies indicate a potential use of Hypericum perforatum (Hypericaceae),
popularly known as St. John’s wort, in medical pain management [187] due to its phenolic compounds.
Many phenolic compounds (e.g., flavonoids) from medicinal plants are promising candidates for new
natural analgesic drugs [188]. Quercetin (27) showed analgesic activity and could reduce neuropathic
pain by inhibiting mTOR/p70S6K pathway-mediated changes of synaptic morphology and synaptic
protein levels in spinal dorsal horn neurons of db/db mice [189], while rutin (28) could inhibit the
writhing response of mice induced by potassium antimony tartrate and showed to be a promising
pharmacological approach to treat pain [190]. The analgesia potency of hyperin (29) was approximately
20-fold of morphine, while luteolin (30) presented e↵ective analgesic activities for both acute and
chronic pain management. Some glycosides of kaempferol (e.g., kaempferol 3-O-sophoroside, 31)
possess significant analgesic activity in the tail clip, tail flick, tail immersion, and acetic acid-induced
writhing models, whereas baicalin (32) shows analgesic e↵ects in several kinds of pain [191]. Fisetin (33),
a plant flavonoid polyphenol, has been reported to possess potent antioxidant, antinociceptive and
neuroprotective activities. In rats, fisetin acts via modulation of decreased levels of biogenic amines
and elevatesoxido-nitrosative stress and ROS to ameliorate allodynia, hyperalgesia, and depression in
experimental reserpine-induced FM [192].
     In a double-blind parallel-group clinical trial, outpatients with FM were randomized to receive
either 15 mg of Crocus sativus (sa↵ron) extract or 30 mg duloxetine (22). No significant di↵erence was
detected for any of the scales neither in terms of score changes from baseline to endpoint between the
two treatment arms, indicating that sa↵ron and duloxetine had comparable efficacy in treatment of FM
symptoms [193].
     It is still unclear the efficacy of natural products extracted from plants in treating FM.
However, some clinical data show promising results and more studies with adequate methodological
quality are necessary in order to investigate the efficacy and safety of natural products as a support in
FM therapy. Figure 7 depicts the chemical formulae of some antinociceptive natural products.




               Figure 7. Chemical structure of some natural compounds with antinociceptive activity.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                     17 of 27



4. Conclusions
      Diagnosis of FM is based on clinical feature and criteria that still lack either a gold standard or at
least supportive laboratory findings. FM diagnostic criteria may include heterogeneous patients also
in clinical trials and this may impair evaluation of clinically meaningful treatment e↵ect.
      The review of the literature suggests that a multidisciplinary therapeutic approach, based on the
combination of pharmacologic and alternative therapy (including thermal, light, electrostimulatory
and body exercise treatments) could improve the quality of life and reduce pain and other symptoms
related to FM. However, sometimes the ability of patients to participate to alternative therapies is
impeded by the level of pain fatigue, poor sleep, and cognitive dysfunction. These patients may need
to be managed with medications before initiating nonpharmacologic therapies.
      Although the use of some natural phytochemicals like BCP and phenolic compounds might replace
other natural products such as D9-THC, because of reduced side e↵ects and higher tolerability, FM self
medication practice may be ine↵ective and in some cases even detrimental. Therefore, providing FM
patients with the correct information about their disorders may help monitoring pharmacological
and alternative therapies. At the same time maintaining information will help patients to receive the
appropriate medications and therapies [194].

Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest

Abbreviations
2-AG             2-ArachidonoylGlycerol
AA               Arachidonic Acid
ACR              American College of Rheumatology
ACTH             Adrenocorticotropic hormone
AEA              N-arachidonoylethanolamine
BDNF             Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factors
CB1              Cannabinoid Receptor 1
CB2              Cannabinoid Receptor 2
CBD              Cannabidiol
CNS              Central Nervous System
EA               Electro-Acupuncture
ESS              Extent of Somatic Symptoms
FIQ              FM Impact Questionnaire
FIQR             FM Impact Questionnaire Revised version
FM               Fibromyalgia
FS               Fibromyalgianess Scale
GABA             Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid
                 Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
GRADE
                 Development, and Evaluation
HBOT             Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy
ICD-11           International Classification of Diseases
IL-1             Interleukin 1 beta
IL-6             Interleukin 6
MA               Manual Acupuncture
PEA              Palmitoylethanolamide
PFM              Primary FM
ROS              Reactive Oxygen Species
SIQ              Symptom Impact Questionnaire
SFM              Secondary FM
SNRIs            Serotonin and Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors
SSRIs            Serotonin Selective Reuptake Inhibitors
SSS              Symptom Severity Scale
TCAs             Tricyclic Antidepressant
TNF↵             Tumor necrosis factor alpha
VAS              Visual Analog Scale
WPI              Widespread Pain Index
D9-THC           Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                    18 of 27



References
1.    Wang, S.M.; Han, C.; Lee, S.J.; Patkar, A.A.; Masand, P.S.; Pae, C.U. Fibromyalgia diagnosis: A review of the
      past, present and future. Expert Rev. Neurother. 2015, 15, 667–679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Chinn, S.; Caldwell, W.; Gritsenko, K. Fibromyalgia pathogenesis and treatment options update. Curr. Pain
      Headache Rep. 2016, 20, 25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Blanco, I.; Beritze, N.; Arguelles, M.; Carcaba, V.; Fernandez, F.; Janciauskiene, S.; Oikonomopoulou, K.; de
      Serres, F.J.; Fernandez-Bustillo, E.; Hollenberg, M.D. Abnormal overexpression of mastocytes in skin biopsies
      of fibromyalgia patients. Clin. Rheumatol. 2010, 29, 1403–1412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Cabo-Meseguer, A.; Cerda-Olmedo, G.; Trillo-Mata, J.L. Fibromyalgia: Prevalence, epidemiologic profiles
      and economic costs. Med. Clin. 2017, 149, 441–448. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Williams, D.A.; Schilling, S. Advances in the assessment of fibromyalgia. Rheum. Dis. Clin. N. Am. 2009,
      35, 339–357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Rahman, A.; Underwood, M.; Carnes, D. Fibromyalgia. BMJ Br. Med. J. 2014, 348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.    McBeth, J.; Mulvey, M.R. Fibromyalgia: Mechanisms and potential impact of the acr 2010 classification criteria.
      Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 2012, 8, 108–116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    Arnold, L.M.; Clauw, D.J.; McCarberg, B.H.; FibroCollaborative. Improving the recognition and diagnosis of
      fibromyalgia. Mayo Clin. Proc. 2011, 86, 457–464. [CrossRef]
9.    Wolfe, F.; Smythe, H.A.; Yunus, M.B.; Bennett, R.M.; Bombardier, C.; Goldenberg, D.L.; Tugwell, P.;
      Campbell, S.M.; Abeles, M.; Clark, P.; et al. The american-college-of-rheumatology 1990 criteria for
      the classification of fibromyalgia—Report of the multicenter criteria committee. Arthritis Rheum. 1990,
      33, 160–172. [CrossRef]
10.   Dworkin, R.H.; Turk, D.C.; McDermott, M.P.; Peirce-Sandner, S.; Burke, L.B.; Cowan, P.; Farrar, J.T.; Hertz, S.;
      Raja, S.N.; Rappaport, B.A.; et al. Interpreting the clinical importance of group di↵erences in chronic pain
      clinical trials: Immpact recommendations. Pain 2009, 146, 238–244. [CrossRef]
11.   Arnold, L.M.; Cro↵ord, L.J.; Mease, P.J.; Burgess, S.M.; Palmer, S.C.; Abetz, L.; Martin, S.A. Patient perspectives
      on the impact of fibromyalgia. Patient Educ. Couns. 2008, 73, 114–120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.   Wolfe, F.; Hauser, W. Fibromyalgia diagnosis and diagnostic criteria. Ann. Med. 2011, 43, 495–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   Wolfe, F. New american college of rheumatology criteria for fibromyalgia: A twenty-year journey.
      Arthritis Care Res. 2010, 62, 583–584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Wolfe, F.; Clauw, D.J.; Fitzcharles, M.A.; Goldenberg, D.L.; Hauser, W.; Katz, R.S.; Mease, P.; Russell, A.S.;
      Russell, I.J.; Winfield, J.B. Fibromyalgia criteria and severity scales for clinical and epidemiological
      studies: A modification of the acr preliminary diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia. J. Rheumatol. 2011,
      38, 1113–1122. [CrossRef]
15.   Oncu, J.; Iliser, R.; Kuran, B. Do new diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia provide treatment opportunity to
      those previously untreated? J. Back Musculoskelet. Rehabil. 2013, 26, 437–443. [CrossRef]
16.   Wolfe, F.; Walitt, B.; Rasker, J.J.; Hauser, W. Primary and secondary fibromyalgia are the same: The universality
      of polysymptomatic distress. J. Rheumatol. 2019, 46, 204–212. [CrossRef]
17.   Bellato, E.; Marini, E.; Castoldi, F.; Barbasetti, N.; Mattei, L.; Bonasia, D.E.; Blonna, D. Fibromyalgia syndrome:
      Etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. Pain Res. Treat. 2012, 2012, 426130. [CrossRef]
18.   Bennett, R.M.; Friend, R.; Marcus, D.; Bernstein, C.; Han, B.K.; Yachoui, R.; Deodhar, A.; Kaell, A.; Bonafede, P.;
      Chino, A.; et al. Criteria for the diagnosis of fibromyalgia: Validation of the modified 2010 preliminary
      american college of rheumatology criteria and the development of alternative criteria. Arthritis Care Res.
      2014, 66, 1364–1373. [CrossRef]
19.   Aggarwal, R.; Ringold, S.; Khanna, D.; Neogi, T.; Johnson, S.R.; Miller, A.; Brunner, H.I.; Ogawa, R.;
      Felson, D.; Ogdie, A.; et al. Distinctions between diagnostic and classification criteria? Arthritis Care Res.
      2015, 67, 891–897. [CrossRef]
20.   Taylor, W.J.; Fransen, J. Distinctions between diagnostic and classification criteria: Comment on the article by
      Aggarwal et al. Arthritis Care Res. 2016, 68, 149–150. [CrossRef]
21.   Wolfe, F.; Clauw, D.J.; Fitzcharles, M.A.; Goldenberg, D.L.; Hauser, W.; Katz, R.L.; Mease, P.J.; Russell, A.S.;
      Russell, I.J.; Walitt, B. 2016 revisions to the 2010/2011 fibromyalgia diagnostic criteria. Semin. Arthritis Rheum.
      2016, 46, 319–329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                    19 of 27



22.   Bidari, A.; Parsa, B.G.; Ghalehbaghi, B. Challenges in fibromyalgia diagnosis: From meaning of symptoms to
      fibromyalgia labeling. Korean J. Pain 2018, 31, 147–154. [CrossRef]
23.   Treede, R.D.; Rief, W.; Barke, A.; Aziz, Q.; Bennett, M.I.; Benoliel, R.; Cohen, M.; Evers, S.; Finnerup, N.B.;
      First, M.B.; et al. Chronic pain as a symptom or a disease: The IASP classification of chronic pain for the
      international classification of diseases (ICD-11). Pain 2019, 160, 19–27. [CrossRef]
24.   Wolfe, F.; Schmukler, J.; Jamal, S.; Castrejon, I.; Gibson, K.A.; Srinivasan, S.; Hauser, W.; Pincus, T. Diagnosis
      of fibromyalgia: Disagreement between fibromyalgia criteria and clinician-based fibromyalgia diagnosis in a
      university clinic. Arthritis Care Res. 2019, 71, 343–351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Eich, W.; Bar, K.J.; Bernateck, M.; Burgmer, M.; Dexl, C.; Petzke, F.; Sommer, C.; Winkelmann, A.; Hauser, W.
      Definition, classification, clinical diagnosis and prognosis of fibromyalgia syndrome: Updated guidelines
      2017 and overview of systematic review articles. Schmerz 2017, 31, 231–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Ra↵aeli, W.; Malafoglia, V.; Bonci, A.; Tenti, M.; Ilari, S.; Gremigni, P.; Iannuccelli, C.; Gioia, C.; Di Franco, M.;
      Mollace, V.; et al. Identification of mor-positive b cell as possible innovative biomarker (mu lympho-marker)
      for chronic pain diagnosis in patients with fibromyalgia and osteoarthritis diseases. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020,
      21, 15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Hackshaw, K.V.; Aykas, D.P.; Sigurdson, G.T.; Plans, M.; Madiai, F.; Yu, L.B.; Buffington, C.A.T.; Giusti, M.M.;
      Rodriguez-Saona, L. Metabolic fingerprinting for diagnosis of fibromyalgia and other rheumatologic disorders.
      J. Biol. Chem. 2019, 294, 2555–2568. [CrossRef]
28.   Wolfe, F. Criteria for fibromyalgia? What is fibromyalgia? Limitations to current concepts of fibromyalgia
      and fibromyalgia criteria. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 2017, 35, S3–S5.
29.   Walitt, B.; Nahin, R.L.; Katz, R.S.; Bergman, M.J.; Wolfe, F. The prevalence and characteristics of fibromyalgia
      in the 2012 national health interview survey. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0138024. [CrossRef]
30.   Moore, R.A.; Straube, S.; Aldington, D. Pain measures and cut-o↵s—No worse than mild pain as a simple,
      universal outcome. Anaesthesia 2013, 68, 400–412. [CrossRef]
31.   Espejo, J.A.; Garcia-Escudero, M.; Oltra, E. Unraveling the molecular determinants of manual
      therapy: An approach to integrative therapeutics for the treatment of fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue
      syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Calandre, E.P.; Rico-Villademoros, F.; Slim, M. An update on pharmacotherapy for the treatment of
      fibromyalgia. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 2015, 16, 1347–1368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Thorpe, J.; Shum, B.; Moore, R.A.; Wi↵en, P.J.; Gilron, I. Combination pharmacotherapy for the treatment of
      fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2018, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Mease, P.J.; Seymour, K. Fibromyalgia: Should the treatment paradigm be monotherapy or combination
      pharmacotherapy? Curr. Pain Headache Rep. 2008, 12, 399–405. [CrossRef]
35.   Kwiatek, R. Treatment of fibromyalgia. Aust. Prescr. 2017, 40, 179–183. [CrossRef]
36.   Wright, C.L.; Mist, S.D.; Ross, R.L.; Jones, K.D. Duloxetine for the treatment of fibromyalgia. Expert Rev.
      Clin. Immunol. 2010, 6, 745–756. [CrossRef]
37.   Pacher, P.; Batkai, S.; Kunos, G. The endocannabinoid system as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy.
      Pharmacol. Rev. 2006, 58, 389–462. [CrossRef]
38.   De Vries, M.; van Rijckevorsel, D.C.M.; Wilder-Smith, O.H.G.; van Goor, H. Dronabinol and chronic pain:
      Importance of mechanistic considerations. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 2014, 15, 1525–1534. [CrossRef]
39.   Russo, E.B. Clinical endocannabinoid deficiency (CECD)—Can this concept explain therapeutic benefits
      of cannabis in migraine, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome and other treatment-resistant conditions?
      Neuroendocr. Lett. 2004, 25. (Reprinted from Neuroendocrinilogy, 2004, 25, 31–39).
40.   Smith, S.C.; Wagner, M.S. Clinical endocannabinoid deficiency (CECD) revisited: Can this concept
      explain the therapeutic benefits of cannabis in migraine, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome and
      other treatment-resistant conditions? Neuroendocr. Lett. 2014, 35, 198–201.
41.   Munro, S.; Thomas, K.L.; Abushaar, M. Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids.
      Nature 1993, 365, 61–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.   Skrabek, R.Q.; Gallmova, L.; Ethans, K.; Perry, D. Nabilone for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. J. Pain
      2008, 9, 164–173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.   Walitt, B.; Klose, P.; Fitzcharles, M.A.; Phillips, T.; Hauser, W. Cannabinoids for fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database
      Syst. Rev. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                  20 of 27



44.   Thomas, A.; Baillie, G.L.; Phillips, A.M.; Razdan, R.K.; Ross, R.A.; Pertwee, R.G. Cannabidiol displays
      unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of cb1 and cb2 receptor agonists in vitro. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2007,
      150, 613–623. [CrossRef]
45.   Baumeister, D.; Eich, W.; Lerner, R.; Lutz, B.; Bindila, L.; Tesarz, J. Plasma parameters of the endocannabinoid
      system are unaltered in fibromyalgia. Psychother. Psychosom. 2018, 87, 377–379. [CrossRef]
46.   Kaufmann, I.; Schelling, G.; Eisner, C.; Richter, H.P.; Krauseneck, T.; Vogeser, M.; Hauer, D.; Campolongo, P.;
      Chouker, A.; Beyer, A.; et al. Anandamide and neutrophil function in patients with fibromyalgia.
      Psychoneuroendocrinology 2008, 33, 676–685. [CrossRef]
47.   Agarwal, N.; Pacher, P.; Tegeder, I.; Amaya, F.; Constantin, C.E.; Brenner, G.J.; Rubino, T.; Michalski, C.W.;
      Marsicano, G.; Monory, K.; et al. Cannabinoids mediate analgesia largely via peripheral type 1 cannabinoid
      receptors in nociceptors. Nat. Neurosci. 2007, 10, 870–879. [CrossRef]
48.   Schley, M.; Legler, A.; Skopp, G.; Schmelz, M.; Konrad, C.; Rukwied, R. Delta-9-thc based monotherapy in
      fibromyalgia patients on experimentally induced pain, axon reflex flare, and pain relief. Curr. Med. Res. Opin.
      2006, 22, 1269–1276. [CrossRef]
49.   Fiz, J.; Duran, M.; Capella, D.; Carbonell, J.; Farre, M. Cannabis use in patients with fibromyalgia: E↵ect on
      symptoms relief and health-related quality of life. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, 5. [CrossRef]
50.   Ware, M.A.; Fitzcharles, M.A.; Joseph, L.; Shir, Y. The e↵ects of nabilone on sleep in fibromyalgia: Results of
      a randomized controlled trial. Anesth. Analg. 2010, 110, 604–610. [CrossRef]
51.   Fitzcharles, M.A.; Ste-Marie, P.A.; Goldenberg, D.L.; Pereira, J.X.; Abbey, S.; Choiniere, M.; Ko, G.; Moulin, D.E.;
      Panopalis, P.; Proulx, J.; et al. 2012 Canadian guidelines for the diagnosis and management of fibromyalgia
      syndrome: Executive summary. Pain Res. Manag. 2013, 18, 119–126. [CrossRef]
52.   Ste-Marie, P.A.; Fitzcharles, M.A.; Gamsa, A.; Ware, M.A.; Shir, Y. Association of herbal cannabis
      use with negative psychosocial parameters in patients with fibromyalgia. Arthritis Care Res. 2012,
      64, 1202–1208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.   Painter, J.T.; Cro↵ord, L.J. Chronic opioid use in fibromyalgia syndrome a clinical review. JCR J. Clin. Rheumatol.
      2013, 19, 72–77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.   Goldenberg, D.L.; Clauw, D.J.; Palmer, R.E.; Clair, A.G. Opioid use in fibromyalgia: A cautionary tale.
      Mayo Clin. Proc. 2016, 91, 640–648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.   Baraniuk, J.N.; Whalen, G.; Cunningham, J.; Clauw, D.J. Cerebrospinal fluid levels of opioid peptides in
      fibromyalgia and chronic low back pain. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 2004, 5, 48. [CrossRef]
56.   Fitzcharles, M.-A.; Faregh, N.; Ste-Marie, P.A.; Shir, Y. Opioid use in fibromyalgia is associated with negative
      health related measures in a prospective cohort study. Pain Res. Treat. 2013, 2013, 7. [CrossRef]
57.   Peng, X.M.; Robinson, R.L.; Mease, P.; Kroenke, K.; Williams, D.A.; Chen, Y.; Faries, D.; Wohlreich, M.;
      McCarberg, B.; Hann, D. Long-term evaluation of opioid treatment in fibromyalgia. Clin. J. Pain 2015,
      31, 7–13. [CrossRef]
58.   Hwang, J.M.; Lee, B.J.; Oh, T.H.; Park, D.; Kim, C.H. Association between initial opioid use and response to a
      brief interdisciplinary treatment program in fibromyalgia. Medicine 2019, 98, 8. [CrossRef]
59.   Harris, R.E.; Clauw, D.J.; Scott, D.J.; McLean, S.A.; Gracely, R.H.; Zubieta, J.K. Decreased central mu-opioid
      receptor availability in fibromyalgia. J. Neurosci. 2007, 27, 10000–10006. [CrossRef]
60.   Bennett, R.M.; Jones, J.; Turk, D.C.; Russell, I.J.; Matallana, L. An internet survey of 2596 people with
      fibromyalgia. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 2007, 8, 27.
61.   Hilliard, P.E.; Waljee, J.; Moser, S.; Metz, L.; Mathis, M.; Goesling, J.; Cron, D.; Clauw, D.J.; Englesbe, M.;
      Abecasis, G.; et al. Prevalence of preoperative opioid use and characteristics associated with opioid
      use among patients presenting for surgeryprevalence of preoperative opioid use and associated patient
      characteristicsprevalence of preoperative opioid use and associated patient characteristics. JAMA Surg. 2018,
      153, 929–937. [PubMed]
62.   Gaskell, H.; Moore, R.A.; Derry, S.; Stannard, C. Oxycodone for pain in fibromyalgia in adults.
      Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2016, 23. [CrossRef]
63.   Ruette, P.; Stuyck, J.; Debeer, P. Neuropathic arthropathy of the shoulder and elbow associated with
      syringomyelia: A report of 3 cases. Acta Orthop. Belg. 2007, 73, 525–529. [PubMed]
64.   Williams, E.R.; Ford, C.M.; Simonds, J.G.; Leal, A.K. Blocking peripheral opioid receptors with naloxone
      methiodide prevents acute and chronic training-induced analgesia in a rat model of fibromyalgia. FASEB J.
      2017, 31, 1.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                  21 of 27



65.   Hermans, L.; Nijs, J.; Calders, P.; De Clerck, L.; Moorkens, G.; Hans, G.; Grosemans, S.; De Mettelinge, T.R.;
      Tuynman, J.; Meeus, M. Influence of morphine and naloxone on pain modulation in rheumatoid arthritis,
      chronic fatigue syndrome/fibromyalgia, and controls: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled,
      cross-over study. Pain Pract. 2018, 18, 418–430. [CrossRef]
66.   MacLean, A.J.B.; Schwartz, T.L. Tramadol for the treatment of fibromyalgia. Expert Rev. Neurother. 2015,
      15, 469–475. [CrossRef]
67.   Gur, A.; Calgan, N.; Nas, K.; Cevik, R.; Sarac, A.J. Low dose of tramadol in the treatment of fibromyalgia
      syndrome: A controlled clinical trial versus placebo. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 2006, 65, 556.
68.   Mullican, W.S.; Lacy, J.R.; TRAMAP-ANAG-006 Study Group. Tramadol/acetaminophen combination tablets
      and codeine/acetaminophen combination capsules for the management of chronic pain: A comparative trial.
      Clin. Ther. 2001, 23, 1429–1445. [CrossRef]
69.   Price, D.D.; Staud, R.; Robinson, M.E.; Mauderli, A.P.; Cannon, R.; Vierck, C.J. Enhanced temporal summation
      of second pain and its central modulation in fibromyalgia patients. Pain 2002, 99, 49–59. [CrossRef]
70.   Larabi, I.A.; Martin, M.; Fabresse, N.; Etting, I.; Edel, Y.; Pfau, G.; Alvarez, J.C. Hair testing for
      3-fluorofentanyl, furanylfentanyl, methoxyacetylfentanyl, carfentanil, acetylfentanyl and fentanyl by
      lc-ms/ms after unintentional overdose. Forensic Toxicol. 2020, 38, 277–286. [CrossRef]
71.   Comer, S.D.; Cahill, C.M. Fentanyl: Receptor pharmacology, abuse potential, and implications for treatment.
      Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2019, 106, 49–57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.   Abeles, A.M.; Pillinger, M.H.; Solitar, B.M.; Abeles, M. Narrative review: The pathophysiology of fibromyalgia.
      Ann. Intern. Med. 2007, 146, 726–734. [CrossRef]
73.   Watkins, L.R.; Maier, S.F. Immune regulation of central nervous system functions: From sickness responses
      to pathological pain. J. Intern. Med. 2005, 257, 139–155. [CrossRef]
74.   Khalil, R.B. Pentoxifylline’s theoretical efficacy in the treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome. Pain Med. 2013,
      14, 549–550. [CrossRef]
75.   Polli, A.; Ghosh, M.; Bakusic, J.; Ickmans, K.; Monteyne, D.; Velkeniers, B.; Bekaert, B.; Godderis, L.; Nijs, J.
      DNA methylation and brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression account for symptoms and widespread
      hyperalgesia in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome and comorbid fibromyalgia. Arthritis Rheumatol.
      2020. [CrossRef]
76.   Scott, J.R.; Hassett, A.L.; Brummett, C.M.; Harris, R.E.; Clauw, D.J.; Harte, S.E. Ca↵eine as an opioid analgesic
      adjuvant in fibromyalgia. J. Pain Res. 2017, 10, 1801–1809. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.   Goodman, C.W.; Brett, A.S. A clinical overview of o↵-label use of gabapentinoid drugs. JAMA Intern. Med.
      2019, 179, 695–701. [CrossRef]
78.   Micheva, K.D.; Buchanan, J.; Holz, R.W.; Smith, S.J. Retrograde regulation of synaptic vesicle endocytosis
      and recycling. Nat. Neurosci. 2003, 6, 925–932. [CrossRef]
79.   Deitos, A.; Soldatelli, M.D.; Dussan-Sarria, J.A.; Souza, A.; Torres, I.L.D.; Fregni, F.; Caumo, W. Novel
      insights of e↵ects of pregabalin on neural mechanisms of intracortical disinhibition in physiopathology
      of fibromyalgia: An explanatory, randomized, double-blind crossover study. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2018,
      12, 14. [CrossRef]
80.   Kiso, T.; Moriyama, A.; Furutani, M.; Matsuda, R.; Funatsu, Y. E↵ects of pregabalin and duloxetine on
      neurotransmitters in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord in a rat model of fibromyalgia. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2018,
      827, 117–124. [CrossRef]
81.   Gerardi, M.C.; Atzeni, F.; Batticciotto, A.; Di Franco, M.; Rizzi, M.; Sarzi-Puttini, P. The safety of pregabalin in
      the treatment of fibromyalgia. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 2016, 15, 1541–1548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.   Hirakata, M.; Yoshida, S.; Tanaka-Mizuno, S.; Kuwauchi, A.; Kawakami, K. Pregabalin prescription for
      neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia: A descriptive study using administrative database in Japan. Pain Res.
      Manag. 2018, 10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.   Asomaning, K.; Abramsky, S.; Liu, Q.; Zhou, X.; Sobel, R.E.; Watt, S. Pregabalin prescriptions in the United
      Kingdom: A drug utilisation study of the health improvement network (thin) primary care database. Int J.
      Clin. Pr. 2016, 70, 380–388. [CrossRef]
84.   Ferreira-Dos-Santos, G.; Sousa, D.C.; Costa, J.; Vaz-Carneiro, A. Analysis of the cochrane review: Pregabalin
      for pain in fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane database syst rev. 2016; 9: Cd011790 and 2016; 4: Cd009002.
      Acta Med. Port. 2018, 31, 376–381. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                 22 of 27



85.    Bhusal, S.; Diomampo, S.; Magrey, M.N. Clinical utility, safety, and efficacy of pregabalin in the treatment of
       fibromyalgia. Drug Healthc. Patient Saf. 2016, 8, 13–23. [CrossRef]
86.    Arnold, L.M.; Choy, E.; Clauw, D.J.; Oka, H.; Whalen, E.; Semel, D.; Pauer, L.; Knapp, L. An
       evidence-based review of pregabalin for the treatment of fibromyalgia. Curr. Med. Res. Opin. 2018,
       34, 1397–1409. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.    Cooper, T.E.; Derry, S.; Wi↵en, P.J.; Moore, R.A. Gabapentin for fibromyalgia pain in adults. Cochrane Database
       Syst. Rev. 2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.    Walitt, B.; Urrutia, G.; Nishishinya, M.B.; Cantrell, S.E.; Hauser, W. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for
       fibromyalgia syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2015, 66. [CrossRef]
89.    Welsch, P.; Uceyler, N.; Klose, P.; Walitt, B.; Hauser, W. Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors
       (SNRIs) for fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2018, 111. [CrossRef]
90.    Grubisic, F. Are serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors e↵ective, tolerable, and safe for adults with
       fibromyalgia? A cochrane review summary with commentary. J. Musculoskelet. Neuronal. Interact. 2018,
       18, 404–406.
91.    VanderWeide, L.A.; Smith, S.M.; Trinkley, K.E. A systematic review of the efficacy of venlafaxine for the
       treatment of fibromyalgia. J. Clin. Pharm. Ther. 2015, 40, 1–6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.    Miki, K.; Murakami, M.; Oka, H.; Onozawa, K.; Yoshida, S.; Osada, K. Efficacy of mirtazapine for the
       treatment of fibromyalgia without concomitant depression: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
       phase IIa study in Japan. Pain 2016, 157, 2089–2096. [CrossRef]
93.    Deboer, T. The pharmacologic profile of mirtazapine. J. Clin. Psychiatry 1996, 57, 19–25.
94.    Ottman, A.A.; Warner, C.B.; Brown, J.N. The role of mirtazapine in patients with fibromyalgia: A systematic
       review. Rheumatol. Int. 2018, 38, 2217–2224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.    Rico-Villademoros, F.; Slim, M.; Calandre, E.P. Amitriptyline for the treatment of fibromyalgia:
       A comprehensive review. Expert Rev. Neurother. 2015, 15, 1123–1150. [CrossRef]
96.    Moore, R.A.; Derry, S.; Aldington, D.; Cole, P.; Wi↵en, P.J. Amitriptyline for fibromyalgia in adults.
       Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2015. [CrossRef]
97.    De Tommaso, M.; Delussi, M.; Ricci, K.; D’Angelo, G. Abdominal acupuncture changes cortical responses to
       nociceptive stimuli in fibromyalgia patients. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 2014, 20, 565–567. [CrossRef]
98.    Karatay, S.; Okur, S.C.; Uzkeser, H.; Yildirim, K.; Akcay, F. E↵ects of acupuncture treatment on fibromyalgia
       symptoms, serotonin, and substance p levels: A randomized sham and placebo-controlled clinical trial.
       Pain Med. 2018, 19, 615–628. [CrossRef]
99.    Deare, J.C.; Zheng, Z.; Xue, C.C.L.; Liu, J.P.; Shang, J.S.; Scott, S.W.; Littlejohn, G. Acupuncture for treating
       fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2013. [CrossRef]
100.   Cao, H.J.; Li, X.; Han, M.; Liu, J.P. Acupoint stimulation for fibromyalgia: A systematic review of randomized
       controlled trials. Evid. Based Complementary Altern. Med. 2013, 2013, 1–15. [CrossRef]
101.   Zhang, X.C.; Chen, H.; Xu, W.T.; Song, Y.Y.; Gu, Y.H.; Ni, G.X. Acupuncture therapy for fibromyalgia:
       A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.                      J. Pain Res.    2019,
       12, 527–542. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102.   Tesio, V.; Torta, D.M.E.; Colonna, F.; Leombruni, P.; Ghiggia, A.; Fusaro, E.; Geminiani, G.C.;
       Torta, R.; Castelli, L. Are fibromyalgia patients cognitively impaired? Objective and subjective
       neuropsychological evidence. Arthritis Care Res. 2015, 67, 143–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103.   Gelonch, O.; Garolera, M.; Valls, J.; Rossello, L.; Pifarre, J. Executive function in fibromyalgia:
       Comparing subjective and objective measures. Compr. Psychiatry 2016, 66, 113–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104.   Zhu, C.E.; Yu, B.; Zhang, W.; Chen, W.H.; Qi, Q.; Miao, Y. E↵ectiveness and safety of transcranial direct current
       stimulation in fibromyalgia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Rehabil. Med. 2017, 49, 2–9. [CrossRef]
105.   Brighina, F.; Curatolo, M.; Cosentino, G.; De Tommaso, M.; Battaglia, G.; Sarzi-Puttini, P.C.; Guggino, G.;
       Fierro, B. Brain modulation by electric currents in fibromyalgia: A structured review on non-invasive
       approach with transcranial electrical stimulation. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 14. [CrossRef]
106.   Dos Santos, V.S.; Zortea, M.; Alves, R.L.; Naziazeno, C.C.D.; Saldanha, J.S.; de Carvalho, S.D.R.; Leite, A.J.D.;
       Torres, I.L.D.; de Souza, A.; Calvetti, P.U.; et al. Cognitive e↵ects of transcranial direct current stimulation
       combined with working memory training in fibromyalgia: A randomized clinical trial. Sci Rep. 2018,
       8, 11. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                   23 of 27



107. Eken, A.; Kara, M.; Baskak, B.; Baltaci, A.; Gokcay, D. Di↵erential efficiency of transcutaneous electrical
     nerve stimulation in dominant versus nondominant hands in fibromyalgia: Placebo-controlled functional
     near-infrared spectroscopy study. Neurophotonics 2018, 5, 15. [CrossRef]
108. Yuksel, M.; Ayas, S.; Cabioglu, M.T.; Yilmaz, D.; Cabioglu, C. Quantitative data for transcutaneous electrical
     nerve stimulation and acupuncture e↵ectiveness in treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome. Evid. Based
     Complementary Altern. Med. 2019, 12, 362831. [CrossRef]
109. Ahmed, S.; Plazier, M.; Ost, J.; Stassijns, G.; Deleye, S.; Ceyssens, S.; Dupont, P.; Stroobants, S.; Staelens, S.; De
     Ridder, D.; et al. The e↵ect of occipital nerve field stimulation on the descending pain pathway in patients
     with fibromyalgia: A water pet and EEG imaging study. BMC Neurol. 2018, 18, 10. [CrossRef]
110. Sutbeyaz, S.T.; Sezer, N.; Koseoglu, F.; Kibar, S. Low-frequency pulsed electromagnetic field therapy
     in fibromyalgia a randomized, double-blind, sham-controlled clinical study. Clin. J. Pain 2009,
     25, 722–728. [CrossRef]
111. Multanen, J.; Hakkinen, A.; Heikkinen, P.; Kautiainen, H.; Mustalampi, S.; Ylinen, J. Pulsed electromagnetic
     field therapy in the treatment of pain and other symptoms in fibromyalgia: A randomized controlled study.
     Bioelectromagnetics 2018, 39, 405–413. [CrossRef]
112. Cruccu, G.; Garcia-Larrea, L.; Hansson, P.; Keindl, M.; Lefaucheur, J.P.; Paulus, W.; Taylor, R.; Tronnier, V.;
     Truini, A.; Attal, N. Ean guidelines on central neurostimulation therapy in chronic pain conditions.
     Eur. J. Neurol. 2016, 23, 1489–1499. [CrossRef]
113. Knijnik, L.M.; Dussan-Sarria, J.A.; Rozisky, J.R.; Torres, I.L.S.; Brunoni, A.R.; Fregni, F.; Caumo, W. Repetitive
     transcranial magnetic stimulation for fibromyalgia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain Pract. 2016,
     16, 294–304. [CrossRef]
114. Thut, G.; Schyns, P.G.; Gross, J. Entrainment of perceptually relevant brain oscillations by non-invasive
     rhythmic stimulation of the human brain. Front. Psychol. 2011, 2, 170. [CrossRef]
115. Weber, A.; Werneck, L.; Paiva, E.; Gans, P. E↵ects of music in combination with vibration in acupuncture
     points on the treatment of fibromyalgia. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 2015, 21, 77–82. [CrossRef]
116. Chesky, K.S.; Russell, I.J.; Lopez, Y.; Kondraske, G.V. Fibromyalgia tender point pain: A double-blind,
     placebo-controlled pilot study of music vibration using the music vibration table. J. Musculoskelet. Pain 1997,
     5, 33–52. [CrossRef]
117. Naghdi, L.; Ahonen, H.; Macario, P.; Bartel, L. The e↵ect of low-frequency sound stimulation on patients
     with fibromyalgia: A clinical study. Pain Res. Manag. 2015, 20, E21–E27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Janzen, T.B.; Paneduro, D.; Picard, L.; Gordon, A.; Bartel, L.R. A parallel randomized controlled trial
     examining the e↵ects of rhythmic sensory stimulation on fibromyalgia symptoms. PLoS ONE 2019,
     14, 19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Ablin, J.N.; Hauser, W.; Buskila, D. Spa Treatment (Balneotherapy) for Fibromyalgia—A Qualitative-Narrative
     Review and a Historical Perspective.                Evid.      Based Complementary Altern.            Med.       2013,
     2013, 638050. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Neumann, L.; Sukenik, S.; Bolotin, A.; Abu-Shakra, M.; Amir, A.; Flusser, D.; Buskila, D. The e↵ect of
     balneotherapy at the dead sea on the quality of life of patients with fibromyalgia syndrome. Clin. Rheumatol.
     2001, 20, 15–19. [CrossRef]
121. Mist, S.D.; Firestone, K.A.; Jones, K.D. Complementary and alternative exercise for fibromyalgia:
     A meta-analysis. J. Pain Res. 2013, 6, 247–260. [CrossRef]
122. Fioravanti, A.; Perpignano, G.; Tirri, G.; Cardinale, G.; Gianniti, C.; Lanza, C.E.; Loi, A.; Tirri, E.; Sfriso, P.;
     Cozzi, F. E↵ects of mud-bath treatment on fibromyalgia patients: A randomized clinical trial. Rheumatol. Int.
     2007, 27, 1157–1161. [CrossRef]
123. Maeda, T.; Kudo, Y.; Horiuchi, T.; Makino, N. Clinical and anti-aging e↵ect of mud-bathing therapy for
     patients with fibromyalgia. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 2018, 444, 87–92. [CrossRef]
124. Guidelli, G.M.; Tenti, S.; De Nobili, E.; Fioravanti, A. Fibromyalgia syndrome and spa therapy: Myth or
     reality? Clin. Med. Insights Arthritis Musculoskelet. Disord. 2012, 5, 19–26. [CrossRef]
125. Ernst, E.; Fialka, V. Ice freezes pain—A review of the clinical e↵ectiveness of analgesic cold therapy. J. Pain
     Symptom Manag. 1994, 9, 56–59. [CrossRef]
126. Rivera, J.; Tercero, M.J.; Salas, J.S.; Gimeno, J.H.; Alejo, J.S. The e↵ect of cryotherapy on fibromyalgia: A
     randomised clinical trial carried out in a cryosauna cabin. Rheumatol. Int. 2018, 38, 2243–2250. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                                 24 of 27



127. Bettoni, L.; Bonomi, F.G.; Zani, V.; Manisco, L.; Indelicato, A.; Lanteri, P.; Banfi, G.; Lombardi, G. E↵ects of
     15 consecutive cryotherapy sessions on the clinical output of fibromyalgic patients. Clin. Rheumatol. 2013,
     32, 1337–1345. [CrossRef]
128. Sutherland, A.M.; Clarke, H.A.; Katz, J.; Katznelson, R. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy: A new treatment for
     chronic pain? Pain Pract. 2016, 16, 620–628. [CrossRef]
129. Bennett, M.H.; French, C.; Schnabel, A.; Wasiak, J.; Kranke, P.; Weibel, S. Normobaric and hyperbaric oxygen
     therapy for the treatment and prevention of migraine and cluster headache. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
     2015. [CrossRef]
130. Yildiz, S.; Kiralp, M.Z.; Akin, A.; Keskin, I.; Ay, H.; Dursun, H.; Cimsit, M. A new treatment modality for
     fibromyalgia syndrome: Hyperbaric oxygen therapy. J. Int. Med Res. 2004, 32, 263–267. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Boussi-Gross, R.; Golan, H.; Fishlev, G.; Bechor, Y.; Volkov, O.; Bergan, J.; Friedman, M.; Hoofien, D.;
     Shlamkovitch, N.; Ben-Jacob, E.; et al. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy can improve post concussion
     syndrome years after mild traumatic brain injury—Randomized prospective trial. PLoS ONE 2013,
     8, e79995. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Efrati, S.; Golan, H.; Bechor, Y.; Faran, Y.; Daphna-Tekoah, S.; Sekler, G.; Fishlev, G.; Ablin, J.N.; Bergan, J.;
     Volkov, O.; et al. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy can diminish fibromyalgia syndrome—Prospective clinical trial.
     PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0127012. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. El-Shewy, K.M.; Kunbaz, A.; Gad, M.M.; Al-Husseini, M.J.; Saad, A.M.; Sammour, Y.M.; Abdel-Daim, M.M.
     Hyperbaric oxygen and aerobic exercise in the long-term treatment of fibromyalgia: A narrative review.
     Biomed. Pharmacother. 2019, 109, 629–638. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Kisselev, S.B.; Moskvin, S.V. The use of laser therapy for patients with fibromyalgia: A critical literary review.
     J. Lasers Med. Sci. 2019, 10, 12–20. [CrossRef]
135. White, P.F.; Zafereo, J.; Elvir-Lazo, O.L.; Hernandez, H. Treatment of drug-resistant fibromyalgia symptoms
     using high-intensity laser therapy: A case-based review. Rheumatol. Int. 2018, 38, 517–523. [CrossRef]
136. Gur, A.; Karakoc, M.; Nas, K.; Cevik, R.; Sarac, A.J.; Ataoglu, S. E↵ects of low power laser and low
     dose amitriptyline therapy on clinical symptoms and quality of life in fibromyalgia: A single-blind,
     placebo-controlled trial. Rheumatol. Int. 2002, 22, 188–193.
137. Panton, L.; Simonavice, E.; Williams, K.; Mojock, C.; Kim, J.S.; Kingsley, J.D.; McMillan, V.; Mathis, R.
     E↵ects of class IV laser therapy on fibromyalgia impact and function in women with fibromyalgia. J. Altern.
     Complement. Med. 2013, 19, 445–452. [CrossRef]
138. Ruaro, J.A.; Frez, A.R.; Ruaro, M.B.; Nicolau, R.A. Low-level laser therapy to treat fibromyalgia. Lasers Med. Sci.
     2014, 29, 1815–1819. [CrossRef]
139. Da Silva, M.M.; Albertini, R.; Leal, E.C.P.; de Carvalho, P.D.C.; Silva, J.A.; Bussadori, S.K.; de Oliveira, L.V.F.;
     Casarin, C.A.S.; Andrade, E.L.; Bocalini, D.S.; et al. E↵ects of exercise training and photobiomodulation
     therapy (extraphoto) on pain in women with fibromyalgia and temporomandibular disorder: Study protocol
     for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 2015, 16, 8. [CrossRef]
140. Busch, A.J.; Webber, S.C.; Brachaniec, M.; Bidonde, J.; Dal Bello-Haas, V.; Danyliw, A.D.; Overend, T.J.;
     Richards, R.S.; Sawant, A.; Schachter, C.L. Exercise therapy for fibromyalgia. Curr. Pain Headache Rep. 2011,
     15, 358–367. [CrossRef]
141. Jones, K.D.; Adams, D.; Winters-Stone, K.; Burckhardt, C.S. A comprehensive review of 46 exercise treatment
     studies in fibromyalgia (1988–2005). Health Qual. Life Outcomes 2006, 4, 67. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Bidonde, J.; Busch, A.J.; Schachter, C.L.; Webber, S.C.; Musselman, K.E.; Overend, T.J.; Goes, S.M.; Dal
     Bello-Haas, V.; Boden, C. Mixed exercise training for adults with fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
     2019, 208. [CrossRef]
143. Assumpção, A.; Matsutani, L.A.; Yuan, S.L.; Santo, A.S.; Sauer, J.; Mango, P.; Marques, A.P. Muscle stretching
     exercises and resistance training in fibromyalgia: Which is better? A three-arm randomized controlled trial.
     Eur. J. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 2018, 54, 663–670. [CrossRef]
144. Nelson, N.L. Muscle strengthening activities and fibromyalgia: A review of pain and strength outcomes.
     J. Bodyw. Mov. Ther. 2015, 19, 370–376. [CrossRef]
145. Sanudo, B.; Galiano, D.; Carrasco, L.; Blagojevic, M.; de Hoyo, M.; Saxton, J. Aerobic exercise versus
     combined exercise therapy in women with fibromyalgia syndrome: A randomized controlled trial. Arch. Phys.
     Med. Rehabil. 2010, 91, 1838–1843. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                               25 of 27



146. Umeda, M.; Corbin, L.W.; Maluf, K.S. Pain mediates the association between physical activity and the impact
     of fibromyalgia on daily function. Clin. Rheumatol. 2015, 34, 143–149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Bement, M.K.H.; Weyer, A.; Hartley, S.; Drewek, B.; Harkins, A.L.; Hunter, S.K. Pain perception after isometric
     exercise in women with fibromyalgia. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2011, 92, 89–95. [CrossRef]
148. Carson, J.W.; Carson, K.M.; Jones, K.D.; Bennett, R.M.; Wright, C.L.; Mist, S.D. A pilot randomized controlled
     trial of the yoga of awareness program in the management of fibromyalgia. Pain 2010, 151, 530–539. [CrossRef]
149. De Oliveira, F.R.; Goncalves, L.C.V.; Borghi, F.; da Silva, L.; Gomes, A.E.; Trevisan, G.; de Souza, A.L.;
     Grassi-Kassisse, D.M.; Crege, D. Massage therapy in cortisol circadian rhythm, pain intensity, perceived
     stress index and quality of life of fibromyalgia syndrome patients. Complement. Ther. Clin. Pract. 2018,
     30, 85–90. [CrossRef]
150. Tomas-Carus, P.; Hakkinen, A.; Gusi, N.; Leal, A.; Hakkinen, K.; Ortega-Alonso, A. Aquatic training and
     detraining on fitness and quality of life in fibromyalgia. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2007, 39, 1044–1050. [CrossRef]
151. Gusi, N.; Tomas-Carus, P. Cost-utility of an 8-month aquatic training for women with fibromyalgia:
     A randomized controlled trial. Arthritis Res. Ther. 2008, 10, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Andrade, C.P.; Zamuner, A.R.; Forti, M.; Franca, T.F.; Tamburus, N.Y.; Silva, E. Oxygen uptake and body
     composition after aquatic physical training in women with fibromyalgia: A randomized controlled trial.
     Eur. J. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 2017, 53, 751–758.
153. Bidonde, J.; Busch, A.J.; Schachter, C.L.; Overend, T.J.; Kim, S.Y.; Goes, S.; Boden, C.; Foulds, H.J.A.
     Aerobic exercise training for adults with fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2017. [CrossRef]
154. Bidonde, J.; Busch, A.J.; Webber, S.C.; Schachter, C.L.; Danyliw, A.; Overend, T.J.; Richards, R.S.; Rader, T.
     Aquatic exercise training for fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2014, 177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Marske, C.; Bernard, N.; Palacios, A.; Wheeler, C.; Preiss, B.; Brown, M.; Bhattacharya, S.; Klapstein, G.
     Fibromyalgia with gabapentin and osteopathic manipulative medicine: A pilot study. J. Altern.
     Complement. Med. 2018, 24, 395–402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Baptista, A.S.; Villela, A.L.; Jones, A.; Natour, J. E↵ectiveness of dance in patients with fibromyalgia:
     A randomised, single-blind, controlled study. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 2012, 30, S18–S23.
157. Assunção, J.C.; Silva, H.J.D.; da Silva, J.F.C.; Cruz, R.D.; Lins, C.A.D.; de Souza, M.C. Zumba dancing
     can improve the pain and functional capacity in women with fibromyalgia. J. Bodyw. Mov. Ther. 2018,
     22, 455–459. [CrossRef]
158. Wang, C.C.; Schmid, C.H.; Fielding, R.A.; Harvey, W.F.; Reid, K.F.; Price, L.L.; Driban, J.B.; Kalish, R.;
     Rones, R.; McAlindon, T. E↵ect of tai chi versus aerobic exercise for fibromyalgia: Comparative e↵ectiveness
     randomized controlled trial. BMJ Br. Med J. 2018, 360, 14. [CrossRef]
159. Cryan, J.F.; Dinan, T.G. Mind-altering microorganisms: The impact of the gut microbiota on brain and
     behaviour. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2012, 13, 701–712. [CrossRef]
160. Galland, L. The gut microbiome and the brain. J. Med. Food 2014, 17, 1261–1272. [CrossRef]
161. Goebel, A.; Buhner, S.; Schedel, R.; Lochs, H.; Sprotte, G. Altered intestinal permeability in patients
     with primary fibromyalgia and in patients with complex regional pain syndrome. Rheumatology 2008,
     47, 1223–1227. [CrossRef]
162. Mayer, E.A.; Tillisch, K.; Gupta, A. Gut/brain axis and the microbiota. J. Clin. Investig. 2015,
     125, 926–938. [CrossRef]
163. Roman, P.; Estevez, A.F.; Mires, A.; Sanchez-Labraca, N.; Canadas, F.; Vivas, A.B.; Cardona, D. A pilot
     randomized controlled trial to explore cognitive and emotional e↵ects of probiotics in fibromyalgia. Sci Rep.
     2018, 8, 9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Butler, D. Translational research: Crossing the valley of death. Nature 2008, 453, 840–842. [CrossRef]
165. Nascimento, S.D.; DeSantana, J.M.; Nampo, F.K.; Ribeiro, E.A.N.; da Silva, D.L.; Araujo, J.X.; Almeida, J.;
     Bonjardim, L.R.; Araujo, A.A.D.; Quintans, L.J. Efficacy and safety of medicinal plants or related
     natural products for fibromyalgia: A systematic review. Evid. Based Complementary Altern. Med.
     2013. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
166. Brownstein, M.J. A brief-history of opiates, opioid-peptides, and opioid receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
     1993, 90, 5391–5393. [CrossRef]
167. Benyhe, S. Morphine—New aspects in the study of an ancient compound. Life Sci. 1994, 55, 969–979. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                               26 of 27



168. Meng, I.D.; Manning, B.H.; Martin, W.J.; Fields, H.L. An analgesia circuit activated by cannabinoids. Nature
     1998, 395, 381–383. [CrossRef]
169. Sagy, I.; Schleider, L.B.L.; Abu-Shakra, M.; Novack, V. Safety and efficacy of medical cannabis in fibromyalgia.
     J. Clin. Med. 2019, 8, 12. [CrossRef]
170. Van de Donk, T.; Niesters, M.; Kowal, M.A.; Olofsen, E.; Dahan, A.; van Velzen, M. An experimental
     randomized study on the analgesic e↵ects of pharmaceutical-grade cannabis in chronic pain patients with
     fibromyalgia. Pain 2019, 160, 860–869. [CrossRef]
171. Habib, G.; Artul, S. Medical cannabis for the treatment of fibromyalgia. JCR J. Clin. Rheumatol. 2018,
     24, 255–258. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Habib, G.; Avisar, I. The consumption of cannabis by fibromyalgia patients in Israel. Pain Res. Treat. 2018,
     5, 7829427. [CrossRef]
173. Ma↵ei, M.E. Plant natural sources of the endocannabinoid (e)- -caryophyllene: A systematic quantitative
     analysis of published literature. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 6540. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
174. Paula-Freire, L.I.G.; Andersen, M.L.; Gama, V.S.; Molska, G.R.; Carlini, E.L.A. The oral
     administration of trans-caryophyllene attenuates acute and chronic pain in mice. Phytomedicine 2014,
     21, 356–362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Gertsch, J.; Leonti, M.; Raduner, S.; Racz, I.; Chen, J.Z.; Xie, X.Q.; Altmann, K.H.; Karsak, M.; Zimmer, A.
     Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008, 105, 9099–9104. [CrossRef]
176. Oliveira, G.L.D.; Machado, K.C.; Machado, K.C.; da Silva, A.; Feitosa, C.M.; Almeida, F.R.D. Non-clinical
     toxicity of beta-caryophyllene, a dietary cannabinoid: Absence of adverse e↵ects in female swiss mice.
     Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2018, 92, 338–346. [CrossRef]
177. Quintans, L.J.; Araujo, A.A.S.; Brito, R.G.; Santos, P.L.; Quintans, J.S.S.; Menezes, P.P.; Serafini, M.R.;
     Silva, G.F.; Carvalho, F.M.S.; Brogden, N.K.; et al. Beta-caryophyllene, a dietary cannabinoid, complexed with
     beta-cyclodextrin produced anti-hyperalgesic e↵ect involving the inhibition of Fos expression in superficial
     dorsal horn. Life Sci. 2016, 149, 34–41. [CrossRef]
178. Ibrahim, M.M.; Porreca, F.; Lai, J.; Albrecht, P.J.; Rice, F.L.; Khodorova, A.; Davar, G.; Makriyannis, A.;
     Vanderah, T.W.; Mata, H.P.; et al. Cb2 cannabinoid receptor activation produces antinociception by stimulating
     peripheral release of endogenous opioids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 3093–3098. [CrossRef]
179. Fidyt, K.; Fiedorowicz, A.; Strzadala, L.; Szumny, A. Beta-caryophyllene and beta-caryophyllene oxide-natural
     compounds of anticancer and analgesic properties. Cancer Med. 2016, 5, 3007–3017. [CrossRef]
180. Klauke, A.L.; Racz, I.; Pradier, B.; Markert, A.; Zimmer, A.M.; Gertsch, J.; Zimmer, A. The cannabinoid
     cb2 receptor-selective phytocannabinoid beta-caryophyllene exerts analgesic e↵ects in mouse models of
     inflammatory and neuropathic pain. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014, 24, 608–620. [CrossRef]
181. Melo, A.J.D.; Heimarth, L.; Carvalho, A.M.D.; Quintans, J.D.S.; Serafini, M.R.; Araujo, A.A.D.; Alves, P.B.;
     Ribeiro, A.M.; Shanmugam, S.; Quintans, L.J.; et al. Eplingiella fruticosa (Lamiaceae) Essential Oil Complexed
     with Beta-Cyclodextrin Improves Its Anti-Hyperalgesic E↵ect in a Chronic Widespread Non-Inflammatory
     Muscle Pain Animal Model. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2020, 135, 7.
182. Dolara, P.; Luceri, C.; Ghelardini, C.; Monserrat, C.; Aiolli, S.; Luceri, F.; Lodovici, M.; Menichetti, S.;
     Romanelli, M.N. Analgesic e↵ects of myrrh. Nature 1996, 379, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
183. Borchardt, J.K. Myrrh: An analgesic with a 4000-year history. Drug News Perspect. 1996, 9, 554–557.
184. Su, S.L.; Hua, Y.Q.; Wang, Y.Y.; Gu, W.; Zhou, W.; Duan, J.A.; Jiang, H.F.; Chen, T.; Tang, Y.P. Evaluation of the
     anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties of individual and combined extracts from Commiphora myrrha,
     and Boswellia carterii. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2012, 139, 649–656. [CrossRef]
185. Lee, D.; Ju, M.K.; Kim, H. Commiphora extract mixture ameliorates monosodium iodoacetate-induced
     osteoarthritis. Nutrients 2020, 12, 17. [CrossRef]
186. Germano, A.; Occhipinti, A.; Barbero, F.; Ma↵ei, M.E. A pilot study on bioactive constituents and analgesic
     e↵ects of myrliq® , a Commiphora myrrha extract with a high furanodiene content. Biomed. Res. Int 2017,
     2017, 3804356. [CrossRef]
187. Galeotti, N. Hypericum perforatum (St John’s Wort) beyond Depression: A Therapeutic Perspective for Pain
     Conditions. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2017, 200, 136–146. [CrossRef]
188. Khan, H.; Pervaiz, A.; Intagliata, S.; Das, N.; Venkata, K.C.N.; Atanasov, A.G.; Najda, A.; Nabavi, S.M.;
     Wang, D.D.; Pittala, V.; et al. The analgesic potential of glycosides derived from medicinal plants. DARU
     2020, 28, 387–401. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7877                                                                            27 of 27



189. Wang, R.Y.; Qiu, Z.; Wang, G.Z.; Hu, Q.; Shi, N.H.; Zhang, Z.Q.; Wu, Y.Q.; Zhou, C.H. Quercetin attenuates
     diabetic neuropathic pain by inhibiting mtor/p70s6k pathway-mediated changes of synaptic morphology
     and synaptic protein levels in spinal dorsal horn of db/db mice. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2020, 882, 7. [CrossRef]
190. Carvalho, T.T.; Mizokami, S.S.; Ferraz, C.R.; Manchope, M.F.; Borghi, S.M.; Fattori, V.; Calixto-Campos, C.;
     Camilios-Neto, D.; Casagrande, R.; Verri, W.A. The granulopoietic cytokine granulocyte colony-stimulating
     factor (G-CSF) induces pain: Analgesia by rutin. Inflammopharmacology 2019, 27, 1285–1296. [CrossRef]
191. Xiao, X.; Wang, X.Y.; Gui, X.; Chen, L.; Huang, B.K. Natural flavonoids as promising analgesic candidates:
     A systematic review. Chem. Biodivers. 2016, 13, 1427–1440. [CrossRef]
192. Yao, X.L.; Li, L.; Kandhare, A.D.; Mukherjee-Kandhare, A.A.; Bodhankar, S.L. Attenuation of
     reserpine-induced fibromyalgia via ros and serotonergic pathway modulation by fisetin, a plant flavonoid
     polyphenol. Exp. Ther. Med. 2020, 19, 1343–1355. [CrossRef]
193. Shakiba, M.; Moazen-Zadeh, E.; Noorbala, A.A.; Jafarinia, M.; Divsalar, P.; Kashani, L.; Shahmansouri, N.;
     Tafakhori, A.; Bayat, H.; Akhondzadeh, S. Sa↵ron (Crocus sativus) versus duloxetine for treatment of patients
     with fibromyalgia: A randomized double-blind clinical trial. Avicenna J. Phytomedicine 2018, 8, 513–523.
194. McCarberg, B.H. Clinical overview of fibromyalgia. Am. J. Ther. 2012, 19, 357–368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.

                            © 2020 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                            article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                            (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
