Reference Text:
 Inflation has slowed and the labor market has softened enough to satisfy the Federal Reserve. That means the central bank is about to cut interest rates.
 

 On Aug. 23, Fed Chair Jerome Powell said, “The time has come for policy to adjust. The direction of travel is clear, and the timing and pace of rate cuts will depend on incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.” In other words, Americans should prepare to finally catch a break when it comes to borrowing to pay for a home, buy a car or open a new credit card. There are also other implications for the health of the broader economy.
 

 Back in March 2022, the Federal Open Markets Committee (FOMC) began to increase the federal funds rate in response to growing inflation. It hiked rates 11 times before finally pausing. The rates, set at 5.25% to 5.50%, haven’t budged since July 2023.
 

 The first cut will almost certainly happen at the Fed’s upcoming meeting scheduled for Sept. 17-18. The futures market’s CME FedWatch Tool now predicts a 87% likelihood that the FOMC will cut the current target rate by 25 basis points; it predicts a 13% likelihood of a larger cut of 50 basis points.
 

 But even if the Fed trims rates next week as expected, the target will still be a long way from the near-zero rate of early 2020 and immediate effects will be muted. Mortgage rates have already been easing in anticipation of a cut, for example, and most consumer credit and lending products are more dependent on your credit score than on the Fed rate. Still, this is viewed as a significant event and could build expectations for more cuts down the road.
 

 So what happens next? NerdWallet writers teamed up to explain how upcoming Fed rate cuts could impact your personal finances and what you can do to prepare. Credit card interest rates are variable, meaning they adjust up or down shortly after the Fed changes the federal funds rate. So if the Fed lowers interest rates, credit card debt will cost slightly less.
 

 The operative word here is “slightly.” Credit card debt is expensive no matter what the federal funds rate happens to be. Let’s say you have an average balance of $5,000 on a card charging 25% APR. You’ll spend around $1,250 in interest over the course of a year. If your interest rate was 24% instead, that’s just $50 less in interest for the year. Point being, a rate reduction doesn’t translate to a massive savings in interest when it comes to credit cards.
 

 Still, you can use the upcoming Fed news as a reminder to check in on your debt and make a plan to pay it down as aggressively as you can. If you qualify, a balance transfer credit card could give you a year or more without interest. Lower interest rates might make a personal loan a compelling debt consolidation option. Mortgage interest rates have already headed lower ahead of any action by the Fed. In April, the average interest rate on a 30-year, fixed-rate loan was 7.04%. August's average was nearly three-quarters of a percentage point lower, at 6.31%. That 73-basis-point drop is larger than any anticipated rate cut, but rates may push even lower once the central bankers start chopping.
 

 Homeowners with adjustable-rate mortgages or home equity lines of credit (HELOCs) should see savings right away as their interest rates ratchet downward. But lower mortgage interest rates might also be a boon to homeowners with fixed-rate mortgages. Those who bought when rates were higher could finally see a significant benefit from refinancing, while owners who feel tethered by their current low mortgage rates may feel more confident about making a move. Reducing that rate "lock in" effect could put more homes on the market, particularly at the starter-home level. Prospective home buyers likely feel heartened by the prospect of rate cuts, but a quarter or even half of a percentage point cut from the Federal Reserve shouldn't cause a sudden drop in mortgage rates, especially with a downward trend already in progress. So, don't wait on the Fed: Buy when you're ready, not when interest rates are. While you're preparing to buy — and during your home search — work on your finances. Continue to pay down high-interest debt, try to build your credit score, don't take out new loans and keep making on-time payments. That way, when you're applying for a mortgage, you'll be in a strong position to get a lender's best possible interest rate regardless of where prevailing rates are. Auto loan interest rates typically follow the path of the Fed rate, but it can take time to see. When car loan rates do begin to fall, will it be a good time to buy or refinance? Here are some considerations to help you decide.
 

 Your APR on a car loan is determined by many factors, such as your credit history, credit score, loan term and vehicle age. Taking time to improve your credit, or to find a slightly used car rather than a new one, is likely to affect your loan rate more than a slight drop in the Fed rate.
 

 From the car-buying perspective, your interest rate is just one part of your monthly payment, which also includes the amount you borrow to pay for the car. In July, the average transaction price for new cars was $48,401, with an average monthly payment of $753. The average listing price for used cars was $25,415. Car prices have improved compared to a year ago, but they still remain higher than pre-pandemic levels. Even when interest rates drop, you will want to focus on a vehicle’s out-the-door price and whether the resulting monthly payment fits your budget.
 

 If you financed a car at a high interest rate, refinancing could be a way to lower the rate and your monthly payment. In general, lenders recommend reducing your rate by 1% or more, without extending the loan term, to get the most out of refinancing. And you’ll want to make sure your savings outweigh any lender or title transfer fees. Since the Fed’s rate decrease is expected to be 50 basis points or less, waiting to refinance after additional rate cuts could be more beneficial.