The Bottom Line
Credit cards offer valuable benefits for both
consumers and retailers. And the majority of
Canadians use their credit card as a method
of payment rather than a means of borrowing.
Credit card benefits
For Consumers
A credit card is a convenient and flexible payment tool
accepted in more than 200 countries and at millions of
locations worldwide. Benefits include:
• Access to unsecured credit (no collateral required
against amounts charged).
• Interest-free payment from time of purchase to the end
of the billing period.
• Instant payment of purchases, allowing for instant
receipt of goods and services.
Focus: Credit Cards:
Statistics and Facts
Focus Sheet
• Credit cards provide
interest-free credit
from the time of
purchase to the end
of the billing period
• More than 70% of
Canadians pay their
credit card balance
in full each month1 ,
so for them the
interest rate is zero
• For those who
choose to carry a
balance:
o Credit cards offer
access to
unsecured credit
(no collateral
required)
o There are many
low interest rate
cards on the
market and over
30 of those cards
have an interest
rate of under 13%
FAST FACTS
• Coverage for purchases if the item is damaged, stolen
or not delivered within 90 days.
• 24/7 access.
• Fraud protection with zero liability to the consumer in
cases of fraud.
• Other rewards and benefits, such as air travel points,
car insurance, damage and loss insurance and
extended warranty programs.
For retailers
Retailers are not required to accept credit cards, but do so
to provide payments options for their customers. Retailers
that do accept credit cards receive many benefits, including:
• Reaching a large customer base – Credit cards are the
preferred method of payment for many customers, and
customers will select retailers that allow them to choose
their preferred method of payment.
• Fast, guaranteed payment, which can reduce line-ups
at checkout. If every credit card transaction took an
extra 30 seconds, it would use up an additional 27
million hours of staff time each year.
• The ability of accepting credit without worrying about
the creditworthiness of customers, insufficient funds or
outstanding receivables.
• Reduced cash on hand and cash handling time and
costs, including counting cash at the end of the day,
armoured transport, higher likelihood of theft and
pilfering and potential mistakes by cashiers.
• Expanded markets; ability to sell to customers
throughout Canada and around the world in the
currency used by the retailer.
• Access to innovative new payments – innovations in
payment options introduced by banks and credit card
companies, such as contactless cards and online and
mobile payments, benefit retailers and make it easier
for customer to make purchases.
Moreover, a very large majority (94 per cent) of merchants
say their business benefits from accepting credit cards.2
• Sixty-nine per cent of merchants say they benefit
from letting customers earn rewards on their
purchases. 3
Competition and choice
When making a purchase, consumers can choose to use
cash, cheques, debit cards, credit cards as well as
electronic payments services like PayPal and Interac
Online. Nearly nine out of ten adult Canadians have at least
one credit card4 and this method of payment is the choice
for the overwhelming majority of retail e-commerce
transactions.
When it comes to choosing a credit card, banks offer
consumers a wide variety of products. Customers may
choose among standard cards without an annual fee,
premium cards that offer rewards and features, and low-rate
cards if the interest rate is a key consideration influencing
the card choice.
• Hundreds of institutions in Canada, including banks,
credit unions, retailers, caisses populaires, trust
companies and finance companies offer credit card
products.
• 76.2 million Visa and MasterCard cards are in
circulation in Canada. 5
• There are many low-rate cards on the market and over
30 of those cards have an interest rate of under 13%.
• Eight in 10 (84 per cent) consumers are satisfied with
their credit cards and roughly the same proportion (86
per cent) say they offer great value. 6
• Canadians appreciate their rewards points programs
and the majority use them to help make a family
vacation more attainable with travel points, save money
on their grocery bills with cash-back rewards or use
their rewards points to donate to a favourite charity.
• Research has found that eighty-three per cent of
consumers use a credit card that provides them
with rewards. 7
• 58 per cent of Canadians who are frequent credit
card users listed “receiving discounts/loyalty
points/rewards’’ as their main reason for frequently
using credit cards for purchases. 8
• Roughly two-thirds of consumers (65 per cent) say
credit card purchases are advantageous to
merchants and directly help them grow their
businesses. 9
Consumers should visit the Financial Consumer Agency of
Canada (FCAC) website www.fcac.gc.ca, for an extensive list
of cards and features, and use the credit card comparison tool
to help select the card that best suits their needs.
Strong regulations 10
Consumers with credit cards from banks are protected by
Bank Act regulations that require:
• Statements to include itemized transactions, the
amount you must pay on or before the due date in
order to have the benefit of a grace period.
• Disclosure of the previous month’s payments and the
current month’s purchases, credit advances, as well as
interest and non-interest charges.
• Disclosure of the interest rate at the time of solicitation
or application, and on every monthly statement.
• Plain language information for customers.
• Rules on advertising.
• Limits on consumer liability in the event of fraud.
Credit card pricing
There are a number of factors that influence card fees and
interest rates.
• An interest-free period from purchase to payment,
depending on the card, as long as the balance is paid
in full when owing.
• Access to unsecured credit where no collateral is needed,
which makes it a higher risk for the credit card issuer.
• Significant costs to operating the credit card system
including processing a large volume of transactions,
technology that is constantly updated to support
transactions, preparing and mailing statements,
collecting payments and the costs for providing value-
added rewards programs.
Most Canadians pay cards off every month
• A Payments Canada survey found that 71% of
Canadians pay their balance off in full every month. 11
• Banks work with clients who are concerned about their
debt, helping them get control of their finances or
choose more suitable credit products. Banks also
support non-profit credit counseling services.
The Canadian Bankers Association is the voice of more than 60
domestic and foreign banks that help drive Canada’s economic
growth and prosperity. The CBA advocates for public policies
that contribute to a sound, thriving banking system to ensure
Canadians can succeed in their financial goals.
Last updated: March 2023
1 Canadian Payment Methods and Trends Report
2022: 71% of Canadians pay their balance off in full
every month.
https://payments.ca/sites/default/files/PaymentsCa
nada_Canadian_Payment_Methods_and_Trends_
Report_2022_En_0.pdf
2 Abacus Data survey commissioned by the
Canadian Bankers Association, October 2022
3 Ibid
4 Canadian Payment Methods and Trends Report
2019: https://leger360.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/canadianpaymentmethod
sandtrendsreport_2019.pdf p. 17
5 CBA credit card statistics as of January 2021
6 Abacus Data survey commissioned by the
Canadian Bankers Association, October 2022
7 ibid
8 Canadian Payment Methods and Trends Report
2022, pg 27:
https://payments.ca/sites/default/files/PaymentsCa
nada_Canadian_Payment_Methods_and_Trends_
Report_2022_En_0.pdf
9 Abacus Data survey commissioned by the
Canadian Bankers Association, October 2022
10 Note – these protections only extend to
federally-regulated financial institutions
(not other card issuers)
11 Canadian Payment Methods and Trends Report
2022: 71% of Canadians pay their balance off in full
every month.
https://payments.ca/sites/default/files/PaymentsCa
nada_Canadian_Payment_Methods_and_Trends_
Report_2022_En_0.pdf