Background: Individuals on the autism spectrum experience various challenges related to social behaviors and may
often display increased irritability and hyperactivity. Some studies have suggested that reduced levels of a hormone
called oxytocin, which is known for its role in promoting social bonding, may be responsible for difculties in social
interactions in autism. Oxytocin therapy has been used of-label in some individuals on the autism spectrum as a
potential intervention to improve social behavior, but previous studies have not been able to confrm its efcacy.
Earlier clinical trials examining oxytocin in autism have shown widely varying results. This large randomized
controlled trial sought to resolve the previous contradictory fndings and determine whether extended use of
oxytocin can help to improve social behaviors in children and teenagers on the autism spectrum.
Methods & Findings: Tis study evaluated whether a nasal oxytocin spray could afect social interactions and
other behaviors (e.g., irritability, social withdrawal, and hyperactivity) in children and adolescents on the autism
spectrum during a 24-week clinical trial. Individuals between the ages of 3 and 17 were assessed by trained
researchers and were selected for participation if they met the criteria for autism. Participants were then randomly
assigned to receive either a nasal oxytocin spray or a placebo (i.e., a comparison nasal spray that did not contain
oxytocin) every day at a series of gradually increasing doses. Participants received social interaction scores every
4 weeks based on multiple assessments that were completed by caregivers or the participant. Separate analyses
were performed in groups of individuals with minimal verbal fuency and high verbal fuency. Tis study found
no diference in social interaction scores between the oxytocin group and the placebo group and no diference
between the groups with difering levels of verbal ability.
Implications: Te fndings of this study demonstrate that extended use of a nasal oxytocin spray over a 24-week
period does not make a detectable diference in measured social interactions or behaviors in children and adolescents
with autism. While this study showed no observable social beneft with the use of intranasal oxytocin, there are
remaining questions around issues such as the ideal dose, whether current formulations are able to penetrate the
blood-brain barrier, and whether a longer intervention time course could reveal efects. In addition, future studies
that use techniques such as brain imaging may reveal new information on how oxytocin might be used in autism. 