Detections of contaminants in public water supplies in numerous states have raised questions
about drinking water quality and have increased congressional interest in the Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) efforts to regulate contaminants under the Safe Drinking Water Act
(SDWA). Congress is particularly interested in the EPA’s process for evaluating new
contaminants for potential regulation. Detections of already-regulated contaminants, such as lead,
have also raised concerns about the effectiveness of certain existing regulations.
SDWA is the key federal law that authorizes EPA to promulgate regulations to control contaminants in public water supplies.
Since its enactment in 1974, EPA has issued drinking water regulations for 100 contaminants. Congress has twice revised the
act’s process for evaluating contaminants and developing drinking water regulations (in 1986 and 1996). In 1986, Congress
directed EPA to develop regulations for 83 contaminants within 3 years, and adopt regulations, every 3 years, for at least 25
new contaminants. In 1996, when this regulatory schedule proved unworkable, Congress amended SDWA to establish a riskbased process that prioritizes contaminants for regulation based on health effects and occurrence.
Under SDWA, EPA follows a multistep process to evaluate and prioritize contaminants for regulation. This process includes
identifying contaminants of potential concern, assessing health risks, collecting national occurrence data (and developing
reliable and field-tested analytical methods necessary to do so), and making determinations as to whether a contaminant
warrants regulation. Since 1996, EPA has considered over 7,500 contaminants for potential regulation, revised existing
regulations, and established new regulations and standards for several contaminants.
When EPA determines that a contaminant warrants regulation, SDWA directs EPA to propose a “national primary drinking
water regulation” and request public comment within 24 months. Within 18 months of the proposal, EPA is required to
promulgate a final rule. EPA is required to establish a nonenforceable maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) at a level at
which no known or anticipated adverse health effects occur and allowing for an adequate margin of safety. Drinking water
regulations generally specify a maximum contaminant level (MCL)—an enforceable limit for a contaminant in public water
supplies. SDWA requires EPA to set the MCL as close to the MCLG as “feasible,” taking treatment efficacy and costs into
consideration. Concurrent with proposing a regulation, SDWA requires EPA to publish a “health risk reduction and cost
analysis” for each contaminant covered by the proposed regulation and make a determination whether or not the benefits of
regulation outweigh the compliance costs.
EPA’s regulations generally take effect three years after promulgation, though the agency may allow up to two additional
years, under certain conditions. For each drinking water regulation, SDWA requires EPA to identify a list of best available
technologies, treatment techniques, and other means that EPA finds feasible for meeting the MCL. In addition, EPA is
required to identify treatment technologies that achieve the MCL and are affordable for small systems. Each regulation also
establishes associated monitoring and reporting requirements. SDWA requires EPA to review—and, if necessary, revise—
each existing national primary drinking water regulation every six years. SDWA also requires that any revisions to drinking
water regulations maintain or provide greater health protection.
Under the current SDWA statutory framework, evaluating and developing regulations for contaminants requires data,
including data from peer-reviewed scientific studies on potential health effects and nationally representative occurrence data.
For some contaminants, the availability or development of (1) data, (2) analytical methods to detect contaminants in drinking
water, and (3) treatment technologies pose technical and resource challenges.
Congressional attention has centered on EPA’s implementation of SDWA regulatory development provisions. Some
stakeholders also have raised concerns about regulatory costs for communities. In recent Congresses, some Members have
raised concerns that the act’s process is lengthy and complicated and does not allow for the timely regulation of contaminants
of concern in drinking water. Others have expressed concern that proposals to expedite regulation by removing elements of
SDWA regulatory development provisions (e.g., the requirement to use peer-reviewed science or a health-risk-based
approach) may result in increased costs to communities without commensurate public health protection. This debate was
heightened prior to EPA’s determination to regulate per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in 2021, yet stakeholders
raised similar concerns after EPA’s 2024 finalization of a regulation for six PFAS.