Intermittent fastingTrusted Source involves only eating during specific time intervals. There are many ways to do intermittent fasting; it can mean not eating on certain days or only eating food at certain times of the day. Some people seek to use IF to lose weight or maintain a healthy weight.
 

 Some evidenceTrusted Source suggests that intermittent fasting can help people lose body fat and may help reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
 

 However, researchers are still working to understand the potential dangers of intermittent fasting and how to weigh these risks against the potential benefits. Overall, this is an area where there is a need for more data.
 

 Beata Rydyger, a registered nutritionist based in Los Angeles, CA, and clinical nutritional advisor to Zen Nutrients, who was not involved in the study, pointed out a challenge with studying dietary behaviors to Medical News Today:
 

 “Generally speaking, diets are more difficult to study because dietary changes don’t have an immediate effect on health. Most study participants find it hard to track what they eat, and few can adhere to a diet for long enough for beneficial effects to be measured.”
 Reducing calories for weight loss
 T​his study included 547 participants recruited from three different health systems.
 

 Researchers collected information on participants through electronic health records and the use of a specialized mobile app called Daily24. Participants could record when they ate, meal size, the times they went to sleep, and when they woke up.
 

 For each meal recorded, participants estimated meal size as less than 500 calories (small), 500-1,000 calories (medium), or greater than 1,000 calories (large).
 

 Study author Dr. Wendy Bennett, elaborated on their research methods to MNT:
 

 “We designed an app to collect ‘timing of eating,’ and when participants input the timing, we also asked them the size of the meal (small, med, or large). Participants from 3 health systems used the app for 6 months. We linked the app data with survey data with electronic health records.”
 

 Dr. Bennett said that they then analyzed the link between eating intervals, including the participants’ total eating window, the time between their wake-up and bedtime, and the time between their last meal and bedtime, with changes in their weight over about six years.
 

 The researchers found that the timing from the first meal of the day to the last meal of the day was not associated with changes in weight. However, they did find that eating more frequent, larger meals were associated with weight gain.
 

 Data on intermittent fasting is still emerging, so no one study offers all the proof that the method is effective or ineffective. This particular study also had several limitations to consider.
 

 First, researchers could only analyze data from study participants who downloaded and used the Daily24 app. This exclusion may have impacted the study population and results.
 

 They only recruited participants from three health systems, meaning the results cannot necessarily be generalized. Almost 78% of participants were women and white, indicating the need for more diverse future studies.
 

 The study also had a relatively short follow-up time, leading to fewer weight measurements and declines in measurement precision. Researchers were also unable to measure participants’ intentions to lose weight before their enrollment in the study.
 

 The way researchers measured eating periods could not evaluate more complex fasting methods. Data also relied on participants’ self-reporting, and food was not standardized or assessed for quality.
 

 “This study did not specifically assess patterns like intermittent fasting. We also did not assess diet quality for the meals reported in the app,” Dr. Bennett noted to MNT.
 

 “Randomized controlled trials that adjust for caloric intake are needed to further test the role of timing of eating in weight gain prevention and also weight loss,” she added.