With dedicated on-device AI chipsets, mobile devices will have better knowledge of the user's 
needs, being able to deliver personalized services that will make smartphones more intelligent. 
Beyond speed and efficiency, on-device AI offers greater security by providing real-time malware 
detection, recognizing if the device is being misused by identifying user behavior, and spam 
detection over emails and other apps. 
Among the applications and features that will benefit first from on-device AI are: 
 Virtual digital assistants. By being less dependent on cloud AI and connectivity, virtual 
assistants can become the main method for users to interact with the devices. 
 Augmented reality. Augmented reality will also see similar benefits, as it requires 
computation to take place in the cloud. 
 Cameras. Having an on-device processor that constantly analyzes what the camera "sees" 
as users take photos or adjust the brightness, ISO sensitivity, color temperature, and 
exposure duration every time they press the shutter button, and accurately selecting the 
right scene mode automatically, will have an impact on the user experience. 
 Well-being and healthcare. By delivering faster performance — regardless of the quality of 
the network, while providing optimal protection of user data — many apps will be able to 
send notifications to the user (and his or her doctor) in response to real-time analysis of 
patient data and data collected from wearable devices. This will predict health events, 
enabling users to seek medical advice and for doctors to assist patients when a medical 
condition or threat is detected by an AI algorithm. 
Bringing Intelligent Mobile Devices Into Our Lives 
AI will disrupt the way users interact with smartphones in the future, making it work for us. Going to 
the cinema, for example, will be a completely different experience from the one we have today: 
1. Someone with an intelligent phone is walking down the street and sees an ad for the latest 
blockbuster movie. On pointing the phone at the ad, the camera recognizes the movie, 
suggests how likely they are to enjoy it, how much it matches their preferences, and 
prompting them to ask if it should buy tickets. 
2. The phone checks the calendar and suggests when to get the tickets, based on the 
commitments and appointments for the week, as well as the best theater based on the 
predicted location for the day. The phone then sends a message to the person who usually 
goes along, suggesting the movie and asking if they want to come. 
3. The phone buys the tickets and stores them in its digital wallet. 
4. On the day, the phone confirms availability and suggests having dinner before the movie, 
at a nearby restaurant bookmarked on the maps app, reminding the user about the type of 
food served. After confirmation by the user, the phone makes reservations on their behalf. 
5. Based on the traffic, the phone sends a reminder when it is time to leave and, if late, it 
sends an email to the restaurant with an estimated time of arrival. It automatically provides 
directions to the restaurant from the car park. 
6. At the theater the phone automatically displays the ticket on the home screen for faster 
scan. 
One single action triggered from the camera will create a chain of actions that will help people 
manage their lives. AI will make technology work for everyone, rather than people having to adapt 
to the technology's limitations. Smartphones will learn who the users are, what they do and what 
they want to do, and deliver a new user experience, one that is not yet available, effortlessly. 
AI will enable phones to become intelligent and truly personal digital assistants, and it is on-device 
AI that will be the engine to make this happen. 
Benefits of Mobile AI 
The opportunities for always-on devices that do most of their intelligent computing on the device 
are enormous. Running AI on the device rather than in the cloud offers different benefits too: 
 No latency. In many cases, running AI entirely in the cloud will have an impact for 
applications that need to work in real time and are latency-sensitive, such as missioncritical applications and driverless cars. Such applications need to rely on instantaneous 
responses and cannot afford the roundtrip time or operate when there is variable network 
coverage. 
 Increased security and privacy. AI algorithms look for patterns in the data at an 
unprecedented scale. The data collected by the phone will require a roundtrip to the cloud 
if no AI capability is available on the device. Being able to perform AI algorithms on the 
device will provide better security due to the low volumes of data exchanged over the 
network. But it will also provide better privacy, as the AI algorithms will not have to process 
and store the information in the cloud. The cloud is used only to train the algorithms. This 
is paramount in today's environment with new European legislation (GDPR) that aims to 
provide a set of standardized data protection laws across member countries, but also to 
reinforce the data protection rights of individuals. 
 On-device learning. Although most of the training will happen in the cloud, and the 
smartphone has inference capabilities, it still needs to learn the user's behavior so it can 
deliver automated, personalized experiences. On-device learning enables training 
capabilities on the mobile device, so the data does not need to travel to the cloud or be 
stored outside the device. This process can be triggered while the device is idle, which 
allows power saving and ensures no interruptions of other features. 
 Efficiency. Running AI on the device reduces network traffic, as less data is transferred via 
the network to the cloud, and improves performance as apps that need to run in real time 
can achieve lower latency levels on the device. 
 Power saving. Power consumption will be reduced, as the device does not need to 
constantly upload and download AI-related data to be able to process AI algorithms. This 
will have a positive effect on battery life and, by extending it, will improve user experience. 
Challenges of Delivering Mobile AI 
Bringing machine learning and deep learning algorithms to the edge is essential to lower their data 
computation requirements, while enabling mobile devices with chipsets that can process some of 
those algorithms on the device. AI workloads are very compute-intensive. Optimizing AI algorithms 
for use on mobile is a huge challenge, as is the impact on battery life of the intensive 
computational AI algorithms on a real-time and always-on environment. 
Another important challenge with on-device AI is the need to train the algorithms. This requires 
vast amounts of data. The quality and quantity of data is key to successful machine learning. 
Depending on the complexity of the model and the amount of data, training can take place in the 
device or in the cloud. Large models tend to require a lot of processing, which is only available in 
cloud platforms. Some of the predictions needed from AI algorithms require data that is already 
available on the user's device and no other sources are needed to be trained. However, to train 
and run large, complicated neural-network models on mobile devices with less capabilities than 
large servers is a challenge. 
A fundamental challenge of offering on-device AI is related to the nature of the smartphone. 
Designing a chipset that delivers the performance required by highly demanding AI algorithms with 
the restrictions of smartphones in terms of size, power supply, power consumption, and heat 
management is a major challenge. "Mobile SoCs have to deliver the best possible performance, 
while ensuring the highest possible density of core functions with optimal use of energy. The 
[Huawei] Kirin 970's development team introduced a new, innovative HiAI mobile computing 
architecture with a dedicated NPU," said Victor Dragnea from Huawei. 
Developing an AI Ecosystem 
AI platforms provide developer toolkits to build applications using AI algorithms. They combine a 
variety of algorithms with data that can be used directly by developers, without having to build them 
from scratch. Some of the functionality includes image recognition, natural language processing, 
voice recognition, predictive analytics, and other machine learning and deep learning capabilities. 
An important part of bringing AI to smartphones is the creation of an AI ecosystem. This is vital to 
expand the capabilities of the dedicated AI chipsets from a few features on the phone to third-party 
apps. By providing SDKs and APIs, phone makers will enable developers and partners to find new 
uses for AI computing capabilities. 
Huawei is positioning the Kirin 970 as an "open platform for mobile AI." The company emphasizes 
that the chipset will work with any AI framework, such as Caffe2 and TensorFlow, in order for any 
app to access the capabilities of the NPU and AI features.