
Acquisition of Activision Blizzard
Microsoft’s proposed acquisition may be considered both a vertical merger, in which one firm is
the supplier and the other is a customer in the supply chain, and a horizontal merger, in which the
merging firms are direct competitors, offering similar products or services that are considered
substitutes. One concern with vertical mergers is that they may lead to foreclosure, a situation in
which a supplier that competes with the merged firm loses access to a potential customer or a
buyer that competes with the merged firm is denied access to a supplier. A concern with
horizontal mergers is that they may significantly increase the market share of the merged firm,
increasing concentration in the market and reducing competition, thereby enabling the remaining
firms to raise prices. Microsoft’s proposed acquisition may also raise other concerns that typically
have not been raised in merger challenges in recent decades, such as dominance in markets that
may develop in the future and labor market monopsony.36

A key question about Microsoft’s proposed acquisition may be the extent to which Microsoft
might restrict the availability of Activision Blizzard’s video games to its consoles and its
streaming and cloud gaming services. Such a restriction would mean that other companies’
consoles or streaming or cloud gaming services would not be able to offer Activision Blizzard’s
games to consumers. Microsoft has stated that if the merger is approved, it would continue to
make Call of Duty and other popular Activision games available on other gaming consoles in
addition to its Xbox.37 The statement specifies that Activision’s popular content would be
“available on competing platforms like Sony’s PlayStation.” It is unclear, however, if this
commitment pertains only to Sony’s consoles or also applies to PlayStation Plus,38 Sony’s version
of Game Pass. Additionally, it is unclear whether Activision Blizzard’s games would be available
on other streaming or cloud gaming services.
Microsoft could also limit the availability of other games that are or will be under development.
In 2020, after acquiring ZeniMax Media, parent company of the video game developer Bethesda
Softworks,39 Microsoft stated that it would honor the exclusivity commitments Bethesda made 
with Sony for certain games for one year,40 but that future Bethesda games would be made
available for “other consoles on a case by case basis.”
41 The game Starfield, officially introduced
by Bethesda in 2018,42 is scheduled to be released in November 2022 exclusively on Microsoft’s
Xbox Series X and S consoles and Windows PCs; it will not be available on other consoles.43


One potential concern may be how Microsoft’s acquisition might affect competition among
digital stores selling video games for PCs, a market in which both Microsoft and Activision
Blizzard compete. Following the acquisition, Microsoft could operate both Microsoft Store and
Battle.net. This may not have a significant effect on competition, however, because Valve Corp.’s
Steam is considered to be the dominant market player among PC digital stores. In a 2021 lawsuit
alleging anticompetitive practices by Valve, video game developer Wolfire Games estimated that
Valve controlled at least 75% of PC desktop game distribution.44
With respect to subscription or cloud gaming services, Microsoft may be able to increase its
market share with the acquisition by offering more content than other providers. In addition to
developing its own games, Microsoft has entered partnerships with various developers and
publishers. For example, some Game Pass subscribers can access games on Electronic Arts (EA)
Play for no additional cost,45 and Fortnite is available for free on Xbox Cloud Gaming without a
Game Pass membership, although users must have a Microsoft account.46 If Microsoft allows
other subscription or cloud gaming services to distribute Activision Blizzard’s video games, it
may charge these providers a fee to do so, meaning potential competitors could face an additional
cost that Microsoft would not.
Consumers would arguably benefit from having a greater selection of video games offered
through Microsoft’s subscription and cloud gaming services. However, if other subscription and
cloud gaming service providers are unable to increase their market shares, Microsoft may be able
to dominate the market, potentially allowing Microsoft to increase prices in the future. The
salience of this concern may reflect opinions on whether antitrust enforcement should consider 
potential effects on the industry that may affect competition in the future or focus exclusively on
consumer welfare.

Among video game publishers in the United States, Microsoft and Activision Blizzard are
estimated to have the largest market shares.47 IBISWorld reports, however, that competition
among publishers and developers is high, even though the success of new entrants, particularly
among developers, is fairly low.48 Publishers and developers can face high levels of uncertainty
and risk.49 Furthermore, measuring the market share of Microsoft and Activision Blizzard within
the United States may not accurately reflect competition in these markets, given that these
companies compete at a global level. Some industry analysts list Tencent, which is headquartered
in China, as the largest video game publisher worldwide based on revenue;50 Microsoft and
Activision Blizzard are listed among the top 10, along with Sony, Nintendo, EA, and Take-Two
Interactive.51 Microsoft stated that after its acquisition of Activision Blizzard, it would “become
the world’s third-largest gaming company by revenue, behind Tencent and Sony.”
52

Microsoft’s acquisition could reduce the number of potential employers in the video game
industry. At an FTC forum, an Activision Blizzard employee raised concern that consolidation in
the industry could enable firms to hire employees at lower wages than in a competitive market.58
During its acquisition of ZeniMax, Microsoft reportedly stated that it did not plan on making
changes to ZeniMax and that ZeniMax would operate independently following the acquisition.59
One industry analyst viewed the acquisition as a means to support gaming studios under
ZeniMax, which had been struggling financially; according to the analyst, without the acquisition,
ZeniMax would have likely faced layoffs and released fewer games.60 If Microsoft were to utilize
a similar approach with Activision Blizzard, allowing it to essentially operate as a separate entity
within Microsoft, the acquisition might not significantly affect the labor market for developers.
Furthermore, some employees may have skills that would be easily transferrable to firms outside
of the video game industry, which could limit Microsoft’s ability to control wages. Nevertheless,
Microsoft’s acquisition would reduce the number of large, established firms in the video game
industry, which could provide it with greater negotiating power.
Another concern may be that Microsoft’s proposed acquisition could affect ongoing efforts to
reach a collective bargaining agreement for Activision Blizzard employees. This concern was
raised by an Activision Blizzard employee at an FTC forum and by some Senators in a March
2022 letter to the FTC,61 which cited Microsoft’s dismissal of temporary quality assurance 
workers two years after they formed a union in 2014.62 However, on June 13, 2022, Microsoft and
the Communications Workers of America—the union that has been assisting Activision Blizzard
employees—announced that they had entered a labor neutrality agreement enabling workers “to
freely and fairly make a choice about union representation,” which would apply beginning 60
days after Microsoft’s acquisition is completed.63 Furthermore, it is unclear whether working
conditions would improve if Activision Blizzard were to remain an independent company rather
than being acquired by Microsoft.

Some antitrust enforcers are reportedly considering some of the concerns discussed in the
previous section, including the potential effect of Microsoft’s proposed acquisition on competing
gaming subscription services and the market for game developers.64 In response to the March
2022 letter from some Senators asking the FTC to consider whether the transaction might
exacerbate anticompetitive conduct in the labor market,65 FTC Chair Lina Khan stated that she
shares those Senators’ concerns about monopsony power in labor markets.
