The most vulnerable will not get the help they need People need advice across different areas of legal scope to solve their problems sustainably 
Respondents also observed that the client groups who seek help with these areas are amongst the most vulnerable, usually they have multiple problems or experience ‘clusters’ of interrelated problems so need a seamless (or ’holistic’) service. 
The blanket removal of many areas of civil law from legal aid funding will prevent many people with mental health problems from accessing legal support for issues that cannot be neatly delineated into different types and are often central to managing their mental health. Mind/Rethink joint response 
Members of migrant communities, may be more likely to present particularly complex cases involving a range of different factors, or to find that language and cultural barriers mean that it is more difficult for them to resolve cases without legal aid support. Migrants Rights 
Network Priority debts, which could lead to the loss of a home, must be balanced with other key debts, such as council tax arrears and energy bill arrears, which also have a profound effect on consumers’ lives. Addressing a housing related debt in isolation is impracticable and unlikely to lead to a sustainable financial solution. Consumer Focus Wales 
As a matter of principle, we think that the Government’s list of criteria justifying the retention of legal aid should be supplemented by acknowledging cases where the disparity of resources between the parties is such as to unduly restrict the effective participation of one party in the proceedings for redress. Justice
While the attempt to offer legal aid to victims of domestic violence is welcome, it does not cover other vulnerabilities in these cases such as substance misuse, disabilities, and mental health problems. Coordinated Action Against Domestic Abuse 
To exclude areas of law such as housing and debt from the legal aid scheme denies victims of violence the support they need to live a life free from violence. National Federation of Women’s Institutes 
Agencies also questioned whether the new proposed definitions and criteria for the scope of civil funding could work actually in practice. 
The gateways for demonstrating domestic violence are very limited and confined to ongoing proceedings…they do not reflect the pathways victims of domestic violence access to find help and support. Gingerbread
It is nonsensical to create a system where the victim would be entitled to legal aid for related family law proceedings if the perpetrator of domestic violence had been convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, but would be denied legal aid and have to represent herself if the perpetrator had been cautioned for the same offence. Rights of Women 
All the areas which will remain in scope are clearly important, but we believe the definitions and tests proposed would involve greater bureaucracy and problems of legal challenge and interpretation (and) result in many vulnerable people being unable to get the help they need at an early stage if definitions are set too tightly… for example, advising only on debts where a home is at ‘immediate risk’ is not practical, as most clients have multiple debts which must be addressed for them to achieve a sustainable financial position. Citizens Advice
No legal aid will mean no help or advice for many 
There was a widespread view from respondents that for the ‘out of scope’ categories, the Green Paper contained misleading assertions about alternative sources of advice, and the capacity within the pro-bono and voluntary sectors to provide appropriate help. For example, National Debtline do not provide face-to-face debt advice and refer cases requiring specialist legal advice elsewhere.5 
The ability of clients to use paid for, or conditional fee (CFA) and insurance funded services as an alternative to public funding was also questioned. The implication that charities like Disability Alliance are available to help people in the advent of legal aid cuts misrepresents the reality that we do not provide such support. Disability Alliance 
The Green Paper mentions IPSEA, the Advisory Centre for Education (ACE) and Parent Partnership Services (PPS) as alternative sources of support to legal aid in education cases…they do not have the capacity, and in some cases do not have the remit to deliver the level of support parents need in SEN education cases. Ambitious about Autism 
Reducing legal aid in the area of employment law will increase the demand on our free helpline but in the current economic climate it is unlikely that we will be able to meet the additional demand. Working Families 
One of the major barriers to the greater use of CFAs is disbursement funding and the costs of investigation. These costs are substantial in clinical negligence claims. Action Against Medical Accidents
Legal aid saves the public purse money 
Many responses pointed to the value of legal aid, both in terms of its social value and its outcomes for clients, but also in terms of the cost savings to the justice system and to other statutory services, and the Government’s broader agenda to improve family and relationship support. Legal aid in administrative justice represents exceptional value for money. For example, welfare benefits legal aid cost £28.3 million in 2009/10, representing less than 0.18 per cent of the £16 billion value of unclaimed benefits. The success rate of legally-aided clients in this and several other administrative jurisdictions is over 90 per cent. Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council 
There is a strong case for targeting legal aid investment where it can have the greatest impact – this involves taking a broader view than simply looking at issues of loss of liberty or imminent homelessness, but should involve reconfiguring services to be more client-centred and targeting services better at those client groups for whom getting advice has the greatest beneficial impact. Youth Access 
In many of our cases at the CLC, the provision of legal advice and assistance can help resolve problems quickly and prevent matters from escalating. Removing access to legal advice in many civil and family law matters removes the possibility for problems to be resolved early and efficiently without the need for litigation. Childrens’ Legal Centre
Proposals to withdraw legal aid when combined with the evidence of the lack of awareness of alternative support services will undermine Government’s broader agenda for relationship support...and increases the risk of the divorcing and separating population’s personal indebtedness...Couples spend an average of £28,000 when a marriage ends. National Family Mediation 
If the legal aid cuts go through and people are denied a lawyer for custody cases, I will lose all chance of ever seeing my children again. Client from Crossroads Women’s Centre 
Respondents found evidence to back this up such as the Legal Services Research Centre’s work on exclusion and legal problems.6 The General Council of the Bar for example had commissioned a ‘cohort’ analysis which compared the outcomes for advice seekers recorded by the LSRC’s civil and social justice survey as between those who sought help from informal sources, non-legal service providers, and legal aid providers. This identified a statistically significant better level of outcomes from legal aid services.7 
The Law Society, LAPG, ILPA, EHRC, LASA, ASA and many others referred to the ‘business case’ research by Citizens Advice which used LSC outcomes and data from the LSRC’s civil and social justice survey to estimate (on 2008-9 figures) the cost-benefit ratio for key civil categories of legal aid advice. This research looked at the ‘adverse consequences’ of civil problems and found that: 
• for every £1 of legal aid expenditure on housing advice, the state potentially saves £2.34 
• for every £1 of legal aid expenditure on debt advice, the state potentially saves £2.98 
• for every £1 of legal aid expenditure on benefits advice, the state potentially saves £8.80 
• for every £1 of legal aid expenditure on employment advice, the state potentially saves £7.13.8 
Some respondents referred to work undertaken by the New Economics Foundation for the Law Centres Federation also suggested that the ‘social return’ for legal help for clients with the most complex problems could be as high £10 to every £1 invested.9
