Context: The State Supreme Court’s inclusion of vote counts based on these variant standards exemplifies
concerns with the remedial processes that were under way …
In addition to these difficulties the actual process by which the votes were to be counted under the Florida Supreme
Court’s decision raises further concerns. That order did not specify who would recount the ballots. The county can-
vassing boards were forced to pull together ad hoc teams of judges from various Circuits who had no previous training
in handling and interpreting ballots. Furthermore, while others were permitted to observe, they were prohibited from
objecting during the recount.
The recount process, in its features here described, is inconsistent with the minimum procedures necessary to protect
the fundamental right of each voter in the special instance of a statewide recount under the authority of a single state
judicial officer. Our consideration is limited to the present circumstances, for the problem of equal protection in election
processes generally presents many complexities.
The question before the Court is not whether local entities, in the exercise of their expertise, may develop different sys-
tems for implementing elections. Instead, we are presented with a situation where a state court with the power to assure
uniformity has ordered a statewide recount with minimal procedural safeguards. When a court orders a statewide rem-
edy, there must be at least some assurance that the rudimentary requirements of equal treatment and fundamental fair-
ness are satisfied …
Upon due consideration of the difficulties identified to this point, it is obvious that the recount cannot be conducted
in compliance with the requirements of equal protection and due process without substantial additional work. It would
require not only the adoption (after opportunity for argument) of adequate statewide standards for determining what
is a legal vote, and practicable procedures to implement them, but also orderly judicial review of any disputed matters
that might arise. In addition, the Secretary has advised that the recount of only a portion of the ballots requires that the
vote tabulation equipment be used to screen out undervotes, a function for which the machines were not designed. If a
recount of overvotes were also required, perhaps even a second screening would be necessary. Use of the equipment for
this purpose, and any new software developed for it, would have to be evaluated for accuracy by the Secretary …
Because it is evident that any recount seeking to meet the December 12 date will be unconstitutional for the reasons we
have discussed, we reverse the judgment of the Supreme Court of Florida ordering a recount to proceed …
None are more conscious of the vital limits on judicial authority than are the Members of this Court, and none stand
more in admiration of the Constitution’s design to leave the selection of the President to the people, through their leg-
islatures, and to the political sphere. When contending parties invoke the process of the courts, however, it becomes our
unsought responsibility to resolve the federal and constitutional issues the judicial system has been forced to confront.
The judgment of the Supreme Court of Florida is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings not incon-
sistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
STRUCTURE OF THE PRESIDENCY | 60
Excerpted by Alexandria Metzdorf
§
61 | STRUCTURE OF THE PRESIDENCY
Appointment and Removal Powers
Myers v. United States
272 U.S. 52 (1926)
Decision: Affirmed
Vote: 6-3
Majority: Taft, joined by Van Devanter, Sutherland, Butler, Sanford, Stone
Dissent: Holmes
Dissent: McReynolds
Dissent: Brandeis
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE TAFT delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case presents the question whether, under the Constitution, the President has the exclusive power of removing exec-
utive officers of the United States whom he has appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Myers … was, on July 21, 1917, appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to be a
postmaster of the first class at Portland, Oregon, for a term of four years. On January 20, 1920, Myers’ resignation was
demanded. He refused the demand. On February 2, 1920, he was removed from office by order of the Postmaster Gen-
eral, acting by direction of the President. February 10th, Myers sent a petition to the President and another to the Sen-
ate Committee on Post Offices, asking to be heard if any charges were filed. He protested to the Department against his
removal, and continued to do so until the end of his term. He pursued no other occupation, and drew compensation
for no other service during the interval. On April 21, 1921, he brought this suit in the Court of Claims for his salary
from the date of his removal, which, as claimed by supplemental petition filed after July 21, 1921, the end of his term,
amounted to $8,838.71 …
[By the law] under which Myers was appointed with the advice and consent of the Senate as a first-class postmaster, it is
provided that
“Postmasters of the first, second and third classes shall be appointed and may be removed by the President by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate and shall hold their offices for four years unless sooner removed or suspended accord-
ing to law.”
The Senate did not consent to the President’s removal of Myers during his term. If this statute, in its requirement that
his term should be four years unless sooner removed by the President by and with the consent of the Senate, is valid, the
appellant, Myers’ administratrix, is entitled to recover his unpaid salary for his full term, and the judgment of the Court
of Claims must be reversed. The Government maintains that the requirement is invalid for the reason that, under Article
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 62
II of the Constitution the President’s power of removal of executive officers appointed by him with the advice and con-
sent of the Senate is full and complete without consent of the Senate … We are therefore confronted by the constitutional
question, and cannot avoid it …
The question where the power of removal of executive officers appointed by the President by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate was vested was presented early in the first session of the First Congress. There is no express pro-
vision respecting removals in the Constitution, except as Section 4 of Article II … provides for removal from office by
impeachment …
It was pointed out in this great debate [constitutional convention] that the power of removal, though equally essential to
the executive power is different in its nature from that of appointment. Madison, 1 Annals of Congress, 497 et seq.; Cly-
mer, 1 Annals, 489; Sedgwick, 1 Annals, 522; Ames, 1 Annals, 541, 542; Hartley, 1 Annals, 481. A veto by the Senate-a
part of the legislative branch of the government-upon removals is a much greater limitation upon the executive branch,
and a much more serious blending of the legislative with the executive, than a rejection of a proposed appointment. It is
not to be implied. The rejection of a nominee of the President for a particular office does not greatly embarrass him in
the conscientious discharge of his high duties in the selection of those who are to aid him, because the President usually
has an ample field from which to select for office, according to his preference, competent and capable men. The Senate
has full power to reject newly proposed appointees whenever the President shall remove the incumbents. Such a check
enables the Senate to prevent the filling of offices with bad or incompetent men, or with those against whom there is ten-
able objection.
The power to prevent the removal of an officer who has served under the President is different from the authority to con-
sent to or reject his appointment. When a nomination is made, it may be presumed that the Senate is, or may become,
as well advised as to the fitness of the nominee as the President, but in the nature of things the defects in ability or intel-
ligence or loyalty in the administration of the laws of one who has served as an officer under the President are facts as
to which the President, or his trusted subordinates, must be better informed than the Senate, and the power to remove
him may therefor be regarded as confined for very sound and practical reasons, to the governmental authority which has
administrative control. The power of removal is incident to the power of appointment, not to the power of advising and
consenting to appointment, and when the grant of the executive power is enforced by the express mandate to take care
that the laws be faithfully executed, it emphasizes the necessity for including within the executive power as conferred the
exclusive power of removal.
…
The vesting of the executive power in the President was essentially a grant of the power to execute the laws. But the Pres-
ident, alone and unaided, could not execute the laws. He must execute them by the assistance of subordinates. This view
has since been repeatedly affirmed by this Court. Wilcox v. Jackson (1839) … It was urged that the natural meaning of the
term “executive power” granted the President included the appointment and removal of executive subordinates. If such
appointments and removals were not an exercise of the executive power, what were they? They certainly were not the
exercise of legislative or judicial power in government as usually understood …
It is true that the remedy for the evil of political executive removals of inferior offices is with Congress by a simple expedi-
ent, but it includes a change of the power of appointment from the President with the consent of the Senate. Congress
63 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
must determine first that the office is inferior, and second that it is willing that the office shall be filled by appoint-
ment by some other authority than the President with the consent of the Senate. That the latter may be an important
consideration is manifest, and is the subject of comment by this Court in its opinion in the case of Shurtleff v. United
States, (1903), where this Court said:
“To take away this power of removal in relation to an inferior office created by statute, although that statute provided for
an appointment thereto by the President and confirmation by the Senate, would require very clear and explicit language.
It should not be held to be taken away by mere inference or implication … ”
[P]ostmasters were all by law appointed by the Postmaster General. This was because Congress … so provided. But there-
after, Congress required certain classes of them to be, as they now are, appointed by the President with the consent of
the Senate. This is an indication that Congress deemed appointment by the President with the consent of the Senate
essential to the public welfare, and, until it is willing to vest their appointment in the head of the Department, they will
be subject to removal by the President alone, and any legislation to the contrary must fall as in conflict with the Consti-
tution.
Summing up, then, the facts as to acquiescence by all branches of the Government in the legislative decision of 1789, as
to executive officers, whether superior or inferior, we find that from 1789 until 1863, a period of 74 years, there was no
act of Congress, no executive act, and no decision of this Court at variance with the declaration of the First Congress,
but there was, as we have seen, clear, affirmative recognition of it by each branch of the Government.
Article II grants to the President … the general administrative control of those executing the laws, including the power of
appointment and removal of executive officers … the President’s power of removal is further established as an incident to
his specifically enumerated function of appointment by and with the advice of the Senate, but that such incident does
not, by implication, extend to removals the Senate’s power of checking appointments, and … to hold otherwise would
make it impossible for the President, in case of political or other differences with the Senate or Congress, to take care that
the laws be faithfully executed …
While this Court has studiously avoided deciding the issue until it was presented in such a way that it could not be
avoided, in the references it has made to the history of the question, and in the presumptions it has indulged in favor of
a statutory construction not inconsistent with the legislative decision of 1789, it has indicated a trend of view that we
should not and cannot ignore. When, on the merits, we find our conclusion strongly favoring the view which prevailed
in the First Congress, we have no hesitation in holding that conclusion to be correct, and it therefore follows that the
Tenure of Office Act of 1867, insofar as it attempted to prevent the President from removing executive officer who had
been appointed by him by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, was invalid, and that subsequent legislation of
the same effect was equally so.
For the reasons given, we must therefore hold that the provision of the law of 1876, by which the unrestricted power of
removal of first class postmasters is denied to the President, is in violation of the Constitution, and invalid. This leads to
an affirmance of the judgment of the Court of Claims.
Judgment affirmed.
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 64
Excerpted by Alexandria Metzdorf
§
Humphrey’s Executor v. United States
295 U.S. 602 (1935)
Decision: Affirmed
Vote: 9-0
Majority: Sutherland, joined by Hughes, Van Devanter, McReynolds, Brandeis, Butler, Stone, Roberts, and Cardozo
Mr. Justice SUTHERLAND delivered the opinion of the Court.
Plaintiff brought suit in the Court of Claims against the United States to recover a sum of money alleged to be due the
deceased for salary as a Federal Trade Commissioner from October 8, 1933, when the President undertook to remove
him from office, to the time of his death on February 14, 1934. The court below has certified to this court two questions
… in respect of the power of the President to make the removal. The material facts which give rise to the questions are as
follows:
William E. Humphrey, the decedent, on December 10, 1931, was nominated by President Hoover to succeed himself as
a member of the Federal Trade Commission, and was confirmed by the United States Senate. He was duly commissioned
for a term of seven years, expiring September 25, 1938; and, after taking the required oath of office, entered upon his
duties. On July 25, 1933, President Roosevelt addressed a letter to the commissioner asking for his resignation, on the
ground ‘that the aims and purposes of the Administration with respect to the work of the Commission can be carried out
most effectively with personnel of my own selection,’ but disclaiming any reflection upon the commissioner personally
or upon his services. The commissioner replied, asking time to consult his friends. After some further correspondence
upon the subject, the President on August 31, 1933, wrote the commissioner expressing the hope that the resignation
would be forthcoming, and saying: ‘You will, I know, realize that I do not feel that your mind and my mind go along
together on either the policies or the administering of the Federal Trade Commission, and, frankly, I think it is best for
the people of this country that I should have a full confidence.’
The commissioner declined to resign; and on October 7, 1933, the President wrote him: ‘Effective as of this date you are
hereby removed from the office of Commissioner of the Federal Trade Commission.’
Humphrey never acquiesced in this action, but continued thereafter to insist that he was still a member of the commis-
sion, entitled to perform its duties and receive the compensation provided by law at the rate of $10,000 per annum. Upon
these and other facts set forth in the certificate, which we deem it unnecessary to recite, the following questions are certi-
fied:
1. Do the provisions of section 1 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, stating that ‘any commissioner may be
removed by the President for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office’, restrict or limit the power of
65 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
the President to remove a commissioner except upon one or more of the causes named?
If the foregoing question is answered in the affirmative, then—
2. If the power of the President to remove a commissioner is restricted or limited as shown by the foregoing inter-
rogatory and the answer made thereto, is such a restriction or limitation valid under the Constitution of the
United States?’
The Federal Trade Commission Act … creates a commission of five members to be appointed by the President by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate, and section 1 provides: ‘Not more than three of the commissioners shall be
members of the same political party. … ‘
[The Act] in part provides that:
‘Unfair methods of competition in commerce are declared unlawful.
The commission is empowered and directed to prevent persons, partnerships, or corporations, except banks, and com-
mon carriers subject to the Acts to regulate commerce, from using unfair methods of competition in commerce … ‘
First. The question first to be considered is whether, by the provisions of section 1 … the President’s power is limited to
removal for the specific causes enumerated therein. The negative contention of the government is based principally upon
the decision of this court in Shurtleff v. United States, (1903) …
The situation here presented is plainly and wholly different. The statute fixes a term of office, in accordance with many
precedents … The words of the act are definite and unambiguous.
… The fixing of a definite term subject to removal for cause, unless there be some countervailing provision or circum-
stance indicating the contrary, which here we are unable to find, is enough to establish the legislative intent that the term
is not to be curtailed in the absence of such cause. But if the intention of Congress that no removal should be made dur-
ing the specified term except for one or more of the enumerated causes were not clear upon the face of the statute, as we
think it is, it would be made clear by a consideration of the character of the commission and the legislative history which
accompanied and preceded the passage of the act.
The commission is to be nonpartisan; and it must, from the very nature of its duties, act with entire impartiality. It is
charged with the enforcement of no policy except the policy of the law. Its duties are neither political nor executive, but
predominantly quasi judicial and quasi legislative. Like the Interstate Commerce Commission, its members are called
upon to exercise the trained judgment of a body of experts ‘appointed by law and informed by experience’ …
The legislative reports in both houses of Congress clearly reflect the view that a fixed term was necessary to the effective
and fair administration of the law …
[T]he language of the act, the legislative reports, and the general purposes of the legislation as reflected by the debates,
all combine to demonstrate the congressional intent to create a body of experts who shall gain experience by length of
service; a body which shall be independent of executive authority, except in its selection, and free to exercise its judgment
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 66
without the leave or hindrance of any other official … To the accomplishment of these purposes, it is clear that Congress
was of opinion that length and certainty of tenure would vitally contribute. And to hold that, nevertheless, the members
of the commission continue in office at the mere will of the President, might be to thwart, in large measure, the very ends
which Congress sought to realize by definitely fixing the term of office.
… Second. To support its contention that the removal provision … is an unconstitutional interference with the executive
power of the President, the government’s chief reliance is Myers v. United States (1926) … [T]he narrow point actually
decided was only that the President had power to remove a postmaster of the first class, without the advice and consent
of the Senate as required by act of Congress. In the course of the opinion of the court, expressions occur which tend to
sustain the government’s contention, but these are beyond the point involved and, therefore, do not come within the
rule of stare decisis …
The office of a postmaster is so essentially unlike the office now involved that the decision in the Myers case cannot be
accepted as controlling our decision here. A postmaster is an executive officer restricted to the performance of executive
functions. He is charged with no duty at all related to either the legislative or judicial power. The actual decision in the
Myers case finds support in the theory that such an officer is merely one of the units in the executive department and,
hence, inherently subject to the exclusive and illimitable power of removal by the Chief Executive, whose subordinate
and aid he is. Putting aside dicta, which may be followed if sufficiently persuasive but which are not controlling, the nec-
essary reach of the decision goes far enough to include all purely executive officers. It goes no farther; much less does it
include an officer who occupies no place in the executive department and who exercises no part of the executive power
vested by the Constitution in the President.
The Federal Trade Commission is an administrative body created by Congress to carry into effect legislative policies
embodied in the statute in accordance with the legislative standard therein prescribed, and to perform other specified
duties as a legislative or as a judicial aid. Such a body cannot in any proper sense be characterized as an arm or an eye of
the executive. Its duties are performed without executive leave and, in the contemplation of the statute, must be free from
executive control. In administering the provisions of the statute in respect of ‘unfair methods of competition,’ that is to
say, in filling in and administering the details embodied by that general standard, the commission acts in part quasi leg-
islatively and in part quasi judicially … To the extent that it exercises any executive function, as distinguished from execu-
tive power in the constitutional sense, it does so in the discharge and effectuation of its quasi legislative or quasi judicial
powers, or as an agency of the legislative or judicial departments of the government … If Congress is without authority to
prescribe causes for removal of members of the trade commission and limit executive power of removal accordingly, that
power at once becomes practically all-inclusive in respect of civil officers with the exception of the judiciary provided for
by the Constitution … We are thus confronted with the serious question whether not only the members of these quasi
legislative and quasi judicial bodies, but the judges of the legislative Court of Claims, exercising judicial power … con-
tinue in office only at the pleasure of the President.
We think it plain under the Constitution that illimitable power of removal is not possessed by the President in respect
of officers of the character of those just named. The authority of Congress, in creating quasi legislative or quasi judicial
agencies, to require them to act in discharge of their duties independently of executive control cannot well be doubted.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case presents us with a challenge to the independent counsel provisions of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 …
We hold today that these provisions of the Act do not violate the Appointments Clause of the Constitution, Art. II, § 2,
cl. 2, or the limitations of Article III, nor do they impermissibly interfere with the President’s authority under Article II
in violation of the constitutional principle of separation of powers.
Briefly stated, Title VI of the Ethics in Government Act … allows for the appointment of an “independent counsel” to
investigate and, if appropriate, prosecute certain high-ranking Government officials for violations of federal criminal laws
… The Act requires the Attorney General, upon receipt of information that he determines is “sufficient to constitute
grounds to investigate whether any person [covered by the Act] may have violated any Federal criminal law,” to conduct
a preliminary investigation of the matter … If … the Attorney General has determined that there are “reasonable grounds
to believe that further investigation or prosecution is warranted,” then he “shall apply to the division of the court for the
appointment of an independent counsel … ”
With respect to all matters within the independent counsel’s jurisdiction, the Act grants the counsel “full power and
independent authority to exercise all investigative and prosecutorial functions and powers of the Department of Justice,
the Attorney General, and any other officer or employee of the Department of Justice … ” The functions of the inde-
pendent counsel include conducting grand jury proceedings and other investigations, participating in civil and criminal
court proceedings and litigation, and appealing any decision in any case in which the counsel participates in an official
capacity … the counsel’s powers include “initiating and conducting prosecutions in any court of competent jurisdiction,
framing and signing indictments, filing informations, and handling all aspects of any case, in the name of the United
States … ” … An independent counsel has “full authority to dismiss matters within [his or her] prosecutorial jurisdiction
without conducting an investigation or at any subsequent time before prosecution, if to do so would be consistent” with
Department of Justice policy …
Two statutory provisions govern the length of an independent counsel’s tenure in office. The first defines the procedure
for removing an independent counsel. Section 596(a)(1) provides:
“An independent counsel appointed under this chapter may be removed from office, other than by impeachment and
conviction, only by the personal action of the Attorney General … ”
If an independent counsel is removed pursuant to this section, the Attorney General is required to submit a report to
both the Special Division and the Judiciary Committees of the Senate and the House “specifying the facts found and
the ultimate grounds for such removal.” § 596(a)(2). Under the current version of the Act, an independent counsel can
obtain judicial review of the Attorney General’s action by filing a civil action in the United States District Court for
the District of Columbia … The reviewing court is authorized to grant reinstatement or “other appropriate relief.” §
596(a)(3) …
The other provision governing the tenure of the independent counsel defines the procedures for “terminating” the coun-
sel’s office. Under § 596(b)(1), the office of an independent counsel terminates when he or she notifies the Attorney Gen-
eral that he or she has completed or substantially completed any investigations or prosecutions undertaken pursuant to
the Act …
69 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
Finally, the Act provides for congressional oversight of the activities of independent counsel …
On April 23, 1986, the Special Division appointed James C. McKay as independent counsel to investigate “whether the
testimony of … Olson and his revision of such testimony on March 10, 1983, violated either 18 U. S. C. § 1505 or § 1001,
or any other provision of federal law … ”
McKay later resigned as independent counsel, and on May 29, 1986, the Division appointed appellant Morrison as his
replacement, with the same jurisdiction …
[I]n May and June 1987, appellant caused a grand jury to issue and serve … on appellees. All three appellees moved to
quash the subpoenas, claiming, among other things, that the independent counsel provisions of the Act were unconsti-
tutional and that appellant accordingly had no authority to proceed …
The initial question is, accordingly, whether appellant is an “inferior” or a “principal” officer … If she is the latter, as the
Court of Appeals concluded, then the Act is in violation of the Appointments Clause. The line between “inferior” and
“principal” officers is one that is far from clear, and the Framers provided little guidance into where it should be drawn …
[I]n our view appellant clearly falls on the “inferior officer” side of that line. Several factors lead to this conclusion.
First, appellant is subject to removal by a higher Executive Branch official. Although appellant may not be “subordinate”
to the Attorney General (and the President) insofar as she possesses a degree of independent discretion to exercise the
powers delegated to her under the Act, the fact that she can be removed by the Attorney General indicates that she is to
some degree “inferior” in rank and authority. Second, appellant is empowered by the Act to perform only certain, limited
duties … Admittedly, the Act delegates to appellant “full power and independent authority to exercise all investigative
and prosecutorial functions and powers of the Department of Justice,” § 594(a), but this grant of authority does not
include any authority to formulate policy for the Government or the Executive Branch, nor does it give appellant any
administrative duties outside of those necessary to operate her office. The Act specifically provides that in policy matters
appellant is to comply to the extent possible with the policies of the Department …
Third, appellant’s office is limited in jurisdiction. Not only is the Act itself restricted in applicability to certain federal
officials suspected of certain serious federal crimes, but an independent counsel can only act within the scope of the juris-
diction that has been granted by the Special Division pursuant to a request by the Attorney General. Finally, appellant’s
office is limited in tenure. There is concededly no time limit on the appointment of a particular counsel. Nonetheless,
the office of independent counsel is “temporary” in the sense that an independent counsel is appointed essentially to
accomplish a single task, and when that task is over the office is terminated, either by the counsel herself or by action of
the Special Division. Unlike other prosecutors, appellant has no ongoing responsibilities that extend beyond the accom-
plishment of the mission that she was appointed for and authorized by the Special Division to undertake. In our view,
these factors relating to the “ideas of tenure, duration … and duties” of the independent counsel, Germaine, are sufficient
to establish that appellant is an “inferior” officer in the constitutional sense.
This conclusion is consistent with our few previous decisions that considered the question whether a particular Govern-
ment official is a “principal” or an “inferior” officer …
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 70
Appellees argue that even if appellant is an “inferior” officer, the Clause does not empower Congress to place the power
to appoint such an officer outside the Executive Branch. They contend that the Clause does not contemplate congres-
sional authorization of “interbranch appointments,” in which an officer of one branch is appointed by officers of another
branch. The relevant language of the Appointments Clause is worth repeating. It reads: ” … but the Congress may by
Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the courts of Law, or
in the Heads of Departments.” On its face, the language of this “excepting clause” admits of no limitation on interbranch
appointments. Indeed, the inclusion of “as they think proper” seems clearly to give Congress significant discretion to
determine whether it is “proper” to vest the appointment of, for example, executive officials in the “courts of Law … ”
We also note that the history of the Clause provides no support for appellees’ position …
We do not mean to say that Congress’ power to provide for interbranch appointments of “inferior officers” is unlimited.
In addition to separation-of-powers concerns, which would arise if such provisions for appointment had the potential
to impair the constitutional functions assigned to one of the branches, Ex parte Siebold (1879) itself suggested that Con-
gress’ decision to vest the appointment power in the courts would be improper if there was some “incongruity” between
the functions normally performed by the courts and the performance of their duty to appoint … In this case, however,
we do not think it impermissible for Congress to vest the power to appoint independent counsel in a specially created
federal court …
We now turn to consider whether the Act is invalid under the constitutional principle of separation of powers. Two
related issues must be addressed: The first is whether the provision of the Act restricting the Attorney General’s power to
remove the independent counsel to only those instances in which he can show “good cause,” taken by itself, impermis-
sibly interferes with the President’s exercise of his constitutionally appointed functions. The second is whether, taken as
a whole, the Act violates the separation of powers by reducing the President’s ability to control the prosecutorial powers
wielded by the independent counsel.
Unlike both Bowsher and Myers, this case does not involve an attempt by Congress itself to gain a role in the removal of
executive officials other than its established powers of impeachment and conviction. The Act instead puts the removal
power squarely in the hands of the Executive Branch; an independent counsel may be removed from office, “only by the
personal action of the Attorney General, and only for good cause.” § 596(a)(1) … There is no requirement of congres-
sional approval of the Attorney General’s removal decision, though the decision is subject to judicial review. § 596(a)(3).
In our view, the removal provisions of the Act make this case more analogous to Humphrey’s Executor v. United States,
(1935), and Wiener v. United States, (1958), than to Myers or Bowsher …
Appellees contend that Humphrey’s Executor and Wiener are distinguishable from this case because they did not involve
officials who performed a “core executive function.” They argue that our decision in Humphrey’s Executor rests on a
distinction between “purely executive” officials and officials who exercise “quasi-legislative” and “quasi-judicial” powers.
In their view, when a “purely executive” official is involved, the governing precedent is Myers, not Humphrey’s Executor.
And, under Myers, the President must have absolute discretion to discharge “purely” executive officials at will …
We undoubtedly did rely on the terms “quasi-legislative” and “quasi-judicial” to distinguish the officials involved
in Humphrey’s Executor and Wiener from those in Myers, but our present considered view is that the determination of
whether the Constitution allows Congress to impose a “good cause”-type restriction on the President’s power to remove
71 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
an official cannot be made to turn on whether or not that official is classified as “purely executive … ” The analysis con-
tained in our removal cases is designed not to define rigid categories of those officials who may or may not be removed
at will by the President … but to ensure that Congress does not interfere with the President’s exercise of the “execu-
tive power” and his constitutionally appointed duty to “take care that the laws be faithfully executed” under Article
II. Myers was undoubtedly correct in its holding, and in its broader suggestion that there are some “purely executive”
officials who must be removable by the President at will if he is to be able to accomplish his constitutional role … But as
the Court noted in Wiener:
“The assumption was short-lived that the Myers case recognized the President’s inherent constitutional power to remove
officials no matter what the relation of the executive to the discharge of their duties and no matter what restrictions Con-
gress may have imposed regarding the nature of their tenure … ”
[T]he real question is whether the removal restrictions are of such a nature that they impede the President’s ability to
perform his constitutional duty, and the functions of the officials in question must be analyzed in that light.
Considering for the moment the “good cause” removal provision in isolation from the other parts of the Act at issue in
this case, we cannot say that the imposition of a “good cause” standard for removal by itself unduly trammels on executive
authority. There is no real dispute that the functions performed by the independent counsel are “executive” in the sense
that they are law enforcement functions that typically have been undertaken by officials within the Executive Branch. As
we noted above, however, the independent counsel is an inferior officer under the Appointments Clause … we simply do
not see how the President’s need to control the exercise of that discretion is so central to the functioning of the Executive
Branch as to require as a matter of constitutional law that the counsel be terminable at will by the President …
Nor do we think that the “good cause” removal provision at issue here impermissibly burdens the President’s power to
control or supervise the independent counsel, as an executive official, in the execution of his or her duties under the Act.
This is not a case in which the power to remove an executive official has been completely stripped from the President,
thus providing no means for the President to ensure the “faithful execution” of the laws. Rather, because the indepen-
dent counsel may be terminated for “good cause,” the Executive, through the Attorney General, retains ample authority
to assure that the counsel is competently performing his or her statutory responsibilities in a manner that comports with
the provisions of the Act … Here, as with the provision of the Act conferring the appointment authority of the indepen-
dent counsel on the special court, the congressional determination to limit the removal power of the Attorney General
was essential, in the view of Congress, to establish the necessary independence of the office. We do not think that this
limitation as it presently stands sufficiently deprives the President of control over the independent counsel to interfere
impermissibly with his constitutional obligation to ensure the faithful execution of the laws …
The final question to be addressed is whether the Act, taken as a whole, violates the principle of separation of powers by
unduly interfering with the role of the Executive Branch. Time and again we have reaffirmed the importance in our con-
stitutional scheme of the separation of governmental powers into the three coordinate branches … We have not hesitated
to invalidate provisions of law which violate this principle. On the other hand, we have never held that the Constitution
requires that the three branches of Government “operate with absolute independence … ” In the often-quoted words of
Justice Jackson:
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 72
“While the Constitution diffuses power the better to secure liberty, it also contemplates that practice will integrate the
dispersed powers into a workable government. It enjoins upon its branches separateness but interdependence, autonomy
but reciprocity.” Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, (1952) (concurring opinion).
We observe first that this case does not involve an attempt by Congress to increase its own powers at the expense of
the Executive Branch … Indeed, with the exception of the power of impeachment — which applies to all officers of the
United States — Congress retained for itself no powers of control or supervision over an independent counsel. The Act
does empower certain Members of Congress to request the Attorney General to apply for the appointment of an inde-
pendent counsel, but the Attorney General has no duty to comply with the request, although he must respond within a
certain time limit. § 592(g). Other than that, Congress’ role under the Act is limited to receiving reports or other informa-
tion and oversight of the independent counsel’s activities, § 595(a), functions that we have recognized generally as being
incidental to the legislative function of Congress …
Similarly, we do not think that the Act works any judicial usurpation of properly executive functions. As should be
apparent from our discussion of the Appointments Clause above, the power to appoint inferior officers such as indepen-
dent counsel is not in itself an “executive” function in the constitutional sense, at least when Congress has exercised its
power to vest the appointment of an inferior office in the “courts of Law.” … In addition, once the court has appointed a
counsel and defined his or her jurisdiction, it has no power to supervise or control the activities of the counsel. … [T]he
various powers delegated by the statute to the Division are not supervisory or administrative, nor are they functions that
the Constitution requires be performed by officials within the Executive Branch. The Act does give a federal court the
power to review the Attorney General’s decision to remove an independent counsel, but in our view this is a function
that is well within the traditional power of the Judiciary.
Finally, we do not think that the Act “impermissibly undermine[s]” the powers of the Executive Branch … or “disrupts
the proper balance between the coordinate branches [by] prevent[ing] the Executive Branch from accomplishing its con-
stitutionally assigned functions … ” It is undeniable that the Act reduces the amount of control or supervision that the
Attorney General and, through him, the President exercises over the investigation and prosecution of a certain class of
alleged criminal activity … The Act … gives the Executive a degree of control over the power to initiate an investigation by
the independent counsel. In addition, the jurisdiction of the independent counsel is defined with reference to the facts
submitted by the Attorney General, and once a counsel is appointed, the Act requires that the counsel abide by Justice
Department policy unless it is not “possible” to do so. Notwithstanding the fact that the counsel is to some degree “inde-
pendent” and free from executive supervision to a greater extent than other federal prosecutors, in our view these features
of the Act give the Executive Branch sufficient control over the independent counsel to ensure that the President is able
to perform his constitutionally assigned duties.
In sum, we conclude today that it does not violate the Appointments Clause for Congress to vest the appointment of
independent counsel in the Special Division; that the powers exercised by the Special Division under the Act do not vio-
late Article III; and that the Act does not violate the separation-of-powers principle by impermissibly interfering with
the functions of the Executive Branch. The decision of the Court of Appeals is therefore
Reversed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
73 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
Original excerpt in Lawrence Lessig, Constitutional Law: Separation of Powers, Federalism, and Fourteenth Amendment, published
by H2O. Further excerpted by Alexandria Metzdorf. Licensed under CC BY-NC-SA.
§
NLRB v. Canning
573 U.S. 513 (2014)
Decision: Affirmed
Vote: 9-0
Majority: Breyer, joined by Kennedy, Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan
Concurrence: Scalia (in judgment), joined by Roberts, Thomas, and Alito
Note: A pro forma session is defined as “From the Latin, meaning ‘as a matter of form,’ a pro forma session is a
brief meeting of the Senate, often only a few minutes in duration.” https://www.senate.gov/general/Features/Ses-
sions.htm#:~:text=Pro%20Forma%20Session%3A%20From%20the,following%20the%20November%20gen-
eral%20elections.
Visit https://www.c-span.org/video/?526638-1/senate-pro-forma-session to see the c-span to view a pro forma session.
Justice Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court.
Ordinarily the President must obtain “the Advice and Consent of the Senate” before appointing an “Office[r] of the
United States.” U. S. Const., Art. II, §2, cl. 2. But the Recess Appointments Clause creates an exception. It gives the Pres-
ident alone the power “to fill up all Vacancies that may happen during the Recess of the Senate, by granting Commis-
sions which shall expire at the End of their next Session.” Art. II, §2, cl. 3. We here consider three questions about the
application of this Clause.
The first concerns the scope of the words “recess of the Senate.” Does that phrase refer only to an inter-session recess (i.e.,
a break between formal sessions of Congress), or does it also include an intra-session recess, such as a summer recess in
the midst of a session? We conclude that the Clause applies to both kinds of recess.
The second question concerns the scope of the words “vacancies that may happen.” Does that phrase refer only to vacan-
cies that first come into existence during a recess, or does it also include vacancies that arise prior to a recess but continue
to exist during the recess? We conclude that the Clause applies to both kinds of vacancy.
The third question concerns calculation of the length of a “recess.” The President made the appointments here at issue
on January 4, 2012. At that time the Senate was in recess pursuant to a December 17, 2011, resolution providing for a
series of brief recesses punctuated by “pro forma session[s],” with “no business … transacted,” every Tuesday and Friday
through January 20, 2012 … In calculating the length of a recess are we to ignore the pro forma sessions, thereby treating
the series of brief recesses as a single, month-long recess? We conclude that we cannot ignore these pro forma sessions.
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 74
Our answer to the third question means that, when the appointments before us took place, the Senate was in the midst
of a 3-day recess. Three days is too short a time to bring a recess within the scope of the Clause. Thus we conclude that
the President lacked the power to make the recess appointments here at issue.
The case before us arises out of a labor dispute. The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) found that a Pepsi-Cola
distributor, Noel Canning, had unlawfully refused to reduce to writing and execute a collective-bargaining agreement
with a labor union. The Board ordered the distributor to execute the agreement and to make employees whole for any
losses …
The Pepsi-Cola distributor subsequently asked the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to set the
Board’s order aside. It claimed that three of the five Board members had been invalidly appointed, leaving the Board with-
out the three lawfully appointed members necessary for it to act …
The three members in question were Sharon Block, Richard Griffin, and Terence Flynn. In 2011 the President had nom-
inated each of them to the Board. As of January 2012, Flynn’s nomination had been pending in the Senate awaiting
confirmation for approximately a year. The nominations of each of the other two had been pending for a few weeks. On
January 4, 2012, the President, invoking the Recess Appointments Clause, appointed all three to the Board.
The distributor argued that the Recess Appointments Clause did not authorize those appointments. It pointed out that
on December 17, 2011, the Senate, by unanimous consent, had adopted a resolution providing that it would take a series
of brief recesses beginning the following day … Pursuant to that resolution, the Senate held pro forma sessions every
Tuesday and Friday until it returned for ordinary business on January 23, 2012 … The President’s January 4 appoint-
ments were made between the January 3 and January 6 pro forma sessions. In the distributor’s view, each pro forma
session terminated the immediately preceding recess. Accordingly, the appointments were made during a 3-day adjourn-
ment, which is not long enough to trigger the Recess Appointments Clause.
The Court of Appeals agreed that the appointments fell outside the scope of the Clause. But the court set forth different
reasons … Since the second session of the 112th Congress began on January 3, 2012, the day before the President’s
appointments, those appointments occurred during an intra-session recess, and the appointments consequently fell out-
side the scope of the Clause …
We asked the parties to address not only the Court of Appeals’ interpretation of the Clause but also the distributor’s
initial argument, namely, “[w]hether the President’s recess-appointment power may be exercised when the Senate is con-
vening every three days in pro forma sessions … ”
… [T]he Recess Appointments Clause reflects the tension between, on the one hand, the President’s continuous need for
“the assistance of subordinates,” Myers v. United States, (1926), and, on the other, the Senate’s practice, particularly dur-
ing the Republic’s early years, of meeting for a single brief session each year … We seek to interpret the Clause as granting
the President the power to make appointments during a recess but not offering the President the authority routinely to
avoid the need for Senate confirmation.
75 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
Second, in interpreting the Clause, we put significant weight upon historical practice. For one thing, the interpretive
questions before us concern the allocation of power between two elected branches of Government. Long ago Chief Jus-
tice Marshall wrote that
“a doubtful question, one on which human reason may pause, and the human judgment be suspended, in the decision of
which the great principles of liberty are not concerned, but the respective powers of those who are equally the representa-
tives of the people, are to be adjusted; if not put at rest by the practice of the government, ought to receive a considerable
impression from that practice.” McCulloch v. Maryland, (1819) …
The first question concerns the scope of the phrase “the recess of the Senate … ” The Constitution provides for congres-
sional elections every two years. And the 2-year life of each elected Congress typically consists of two formal 1-year ses-
sions, each separated from the next by an “inter-session recess … ” The Senate or the House of Representatives announces
an inter-session recess by approving a resolution stating that it will “adjourn sine die,” i.e., without specifying a date to
return (in which case Congress will reconvene when the next formal session is scheduled to begin).
The Senate and the House also take breaks in the midst of a session. The Senate or the House announces any such “intra-
session recess” by adopting a resolution stating that it will “adjourn” to a fixed date, a few days or weeks or even months
later. All agree that the phrase “the recess of the Senate” covers inter-session recesses. The question is whether it includes
intra-session recesses as well.
In our view, the phrase “the recess” includes an intra-session recess of substantial length …
History … shows only that Congress generally took long breaks between sessions, while taking no significant intra-session
breaks at all (five times it took a break of a week or so at Christmas) … In 1867 and 1868, Congress for the first time took
substantial, nonholiday intra-session breaks, and President Andrew Johnson made dozens of recess appointments. The
Federal Court of Claims upheld one of those specific appointments, writing “[w]e have no doubt that a vacancy occur-
ring while the Senate was thus temporarily adjourned” during the “first session of the Fortieth Congress” was “legally
filled by appointment of the President alone.” Gould v. United States, (1884) …
… [R]estricting the Clause to inter-session recesses would frustrate its purpose. It would make the President’s recess-
appointment power dependent on a formalistic distinction of Senate procedure. Moreover, the President has consis-
tently and frequently interpreted the word “recess” to apply to intra-session recesses, and has acted on that interpretation.
The Senate as a body has done nothing to deny the validity of this practice for at least three-quarters of a century …
[A] 3-day recess would be too short … The Adjournments Clause reflects the fact that a 3-day break is not a significant
interruption of legislative business. As the Solicitor General says, it is constitutionally de minimis. A Senate recess that
is so short that it does not require the consent of the House is not long enough to trigger the President’s recess-appoint-
ment power.
In sum, we conclude that the phrase “the recess” applies to both intra-session and inter-session recesses. If a Senate recess
is so short that it does not require the consent of the House, it is too short to trigger the Recess Appointments Clause.
See Art. I, §5, cl. 4. And a recess lasting less than 10 days is presumptively too short as well. Applying this standard, we find that the pro forma sessions were sessions for purposes of the Clause. First, the Senate said
it was in session. The Journal of the Senate and the Congressional Record indicate that the Senate convened for a series
of twice-weekly “sessions” from December 20 through January 20 …
Second, the Senate’s rules make clear that during its pro forma sessions, despite its resolution that it would conduct no
business, the Senate retained the power to conduct business. During any pro forma session, the Senate could have con-
ducted business simply by passing a unanimous consent agreement … It is consequently unsurprising that the Senate has
enacted legislation during pro forma sessions even when it has said that no business will be transacted. Indeed, the Senate
passed a bill by unanimous consent during the second pro forma session after its December 17 adjournment …
The Recess Appointments Clause responds to a structural difference between the Executive and Legislative Branches:
The Executive Branch is perpetually in operation, while the Legislature only acts in intervals separated by recesses. The
purpose of the Clause is to allow the Executive to continue operating while the Senate is unavailable. We believe that the
Clause’s text, standing alone, is ambiguous. It does not resolve whether the President may make appointments during
intra-session recesses, or whether he may fill pre-recess vacancies. But the broader reading better serves the Clause’s struc-
tural function. Moreover, that broader reading is reinforced by centuries of history, which we are hesitant to disturb. We
thus hold that the Constitution empowers the President to fill any existing vacancy during any recess—intra-session or
inter-session—of sufficient length.
Given our answer to the last question before us, we conclude that the Recess Appointments Clause does not give the
President the constitutional authority to make the appointments here at issue. Because the Court of Appeals reached the
same ultimate conclusion (though for reasons we reject), its judgment is affirmed.
It is so ordered.
Justice Scalia, with whom The Chief Justice, Justice Thomas, and Justice Alito join, concurring in the judgment.
Except where the Constitution or a valid federal law provides otherwise, all “Officers of the United States” must be
appointed by the President “by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate.” U. S. Const., Art. II, §2, cl. 2. That
general rule is subject to an exception: “The President shall have Power to fill up all Vacancies that may happen during
the Recess of the Senate, by granting Commissions which shall expire at the End of their next Session.” Id., §2, cl. 3. This
case requires us to decide whether the Recess Appointments Clause authorized three appointments made by President
Obama to the National Labor Relations Board in January 2012 without the Senate’s consent.
To prevent the President’s recess-appointment power from nullifying the Senate’s role in the appointment process, the
Constitution cabins that power in two significant ways. First, it may be exercised only in “the Recess of the Senate,” that
is, the intermission between two formal legislative sessions. Second, it may be used to fill only those vacancies that “hap-
pen during the Recess,” that is, offices that become vacant during that intermission. Both conditions are clear from the
Constitution’s text and struc ture, and both were well understood at the founding. The Court of Appeals correctly held
that the appointments here at issue are invalid because they did not meet either condition …
The Court’s decision transforms the recess-appointment power from a tool carefully designed to fill a narrow and specific
need into a weapon to be wielded by future Presidents against future Senates. To reach that result, the majority casts aside
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 78
the plain, original meaning of the constitutional text in deference to late-arising historical practices that are ambiguous
at best. The majority’s insistence on deferring to the Executive’s untenably broad interpretation of the power is in clear
conflict with our precedent and forebodes a diminution of this Court’s role in controversies involving the separation of
powers and the structure of government. I concur in the judgment only …
The first question presented is whether “the Recess of the Senate,” during which the President’s recess-appointment
power is active, is (a) the period between two of the Senate’s formal sessions, or (b) any break in the Senate’s proceedings.
I would hold that “the Recess” is the gap between sessions and that the appointments at issue here are invalid because
they undisputedly were made during the Senate’s session. The Court’s contrary conclusion—that “the Recess” includes
“breaks in the midst of a session,” ante, at 9—is inconsistent with the Constitution’s text and structure, and it requires
judicial fabrication of vague, unadministrable limits on the recess-appointment power (thus defined) that overstep the
judicial role. And although the majority relies heavily on “historical practice,” no practice worthy of our deference sup-
ports the majority’s conclusion on this issue …
What does all this amount to? In short: Intra-session recess appointments were virtually unheard of for the first 130 years
of the Republic, were deemed unconstitutional by the first Attorney General to address them, were not openly defended
by the Executive until 1921, were not made in significant numbers until after World War II, and have been repeatedly
criticized as unconstitutional by Senators of both parties. It is astonishing for the majority to assert that this history lends
“strong support,” ante, at 11, to its interpretation of the Recess Appointments Clause.
The second question presented is whether vacancies that “happen during the Recess of the Senate,” which the President
is empowered to fill with recess appointments, are (a) vacancies that arise during the recess, or (b) all vacancies
that exist during the recess, regardless of when they arose. I would hold that the recess-appointment power is limited
to vacancies that arise during the recess in which they are filled, and I would hold that the appointments at issue
here—which undisputedly filled pre-recess vacancies—are invalid for that reason as well as for the reason that they were
made during the session. The Court’s contrary conclusion is inconsistent with the Constitution’s text and structure, and
it further undermines the balance the Framers struck between Presidential and Senatorial power. Historical practice also
fails to support the majority’s conclusion on this issue …
In sum: Washington’s and Adams’ Attorneys General read the Constitution to restrict recess appointments to vacancies
arising during the recess, and there is no evidence that any of the first four Presidents consciously departed from that
reading. The contrary reading was first defended by an executive official in 1823, was vehemently rejected by the Senate
in 1863, was vigorously resisted by legislation in place from 1863 until 1940, and is arguably inconsistent with legislation
in place from 1940 to the present. The Solicitor General has identified only about 100 appointments that have ever been
made under the broader reading, and while it seems likely that a good deal more have been made in the last few decades,
there is good reason to doubt that many were made before 1940 (since the appointees could not have been compensated).
I can conceive of no sane constitutional theory under which this evidence of “historical practice”—which is actually evi-
dence of a long-simmering inter-branch conflict—would require us to defer to the views of the Executive Branch …
What the majority needs to sustain its judgment is an ambiguous text and a clear historical practice. What it has is a clear
text and an at-best-ambiguous historical practice …
79 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
The real tragedy of today’s decision is not simply the abolition of the Constitution’s limits on the recess-appointment
power and the substitution of a novel framework invented by this Court. It is the damage done to our separation-of-
powers jurisprudence more generally. It is not every day that we encounter a proper case or controversy requiring inter-
pretation of the Constitution’s structural provisions. Most of the time, the interpretation of those provisions is left to
the political branches—which, in deciding how much respect to afford the constitutional text, often take their cues from
this Court. We should therefore take every opportunity to affirm the primacy of the Constitution’s enduring principles
over the politics of the moment. Our failure to do so today will resonate well beyond the particular dispute at hand. Sad,
but true: The Court’s embrace of the adverse-possession theory of executive power (a characterization the majority resists
but does not refute) will be cited in diverse contexts, including those presently unimagined, and will have the effect of
aggrandizing the Presidency beyond its constitutional bounds and undermining respect for the separation of powers.
I concur in the judgment only.
Excerpted by Alexandria Metzdorf
§
Lucia v. SEC
585 U.S. ___ (2018)
Decision: Reversed and remanded
Vote: 7-2
Majority: Kagan, joined by Roberts, Kennedy, Thomas, Alito, and Gorsuch
Concurrence: Thomas, joined by Gorsuch
Concur/dissent: Breyer, joined by Ginsburg, and Sotomayor (Part III only)
Dissent: Sotomayor, joined by Ginsburg
Justice Kagan delivered the opinion of the Court.
The Appointments Clause of the Constitution lays out the permissible methods of appointing “Officers of the United
States,” a class of government officials distinct from mere employees … This case requires us to decide whether adminis-
trative law judges (ALJs) of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC or Commission) qualify as such “Officers.”
In keeping with Freytag v. Commissioner, (1991), we hold that they do …
The SEC has statutory authority to enforce the nation’s securities laws. One way it can do so is by instituting an admin-
istrative proceeding against an alleged wrongdoer. By law, the Commission may itself preside over such a proceeding …
But the Commission also may, and typically does, delegate that task to an ALJ … The SEC currently has five ALJs. Other
staff members, rather than the Commission proper, selected them all …
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 80
An ALJ assigned to hear an SEC enforcement action has extensive powers—the “authority to do all things necessary
and appropriate to discharge his or her duties” and ensure a “fair and orderly” adversarial proceeding … As that
list suggests, an SEC ALJ exercises authority “comparable to” that of a federal district judge conducting a bench
trial. Butz v. Economou, (1978) …
This case began when the SEC instituted an administrative proceeding against petitioner Raymond Lucia and his invest-
ment company. Lucia marketed a retirement savings strategy called “Buckets of Money.” In the SEC’s view, Lucia used
misleading slideshow presentations to deceive prospective clients. The SEC charged Lucia under the Investment Advis-
ers Act, and assigned ALJ Cameron Elliot to adjudicate the case. After nine days of testimony and argument, Judge Elliot
issued an initial decision concluding that Lucia had violated the Act and imposing sanctions, including civil penalties of
$300,000 and a lifetime bar from the investment industry …
On appeal to the SEC, Lucia argued that the administrative proceeding was invalid because Judge Elliot had not been
constitutionally appointed. According to Lucia, the Commission’s ALJs are “Officers of the United States” and thus
subject to the Appointments Clause … [T]he Commission had left the task of appointing ALJs, including Judge Elliot,
to SEC staff members … As a result, Lucia contended, Judge Elliot lacked constitutional authority to do his job …
The sole question here is whether the Commission’s ALJs are “Officers of the United States” or simply employees of the
Federal Government. The Appointments Clause prescribes the exclusive means of appointing “Officers.” Only the Pres-
ident, a court of law, or a head of department can do so.
Two decisions set out this Court’s basic framework for distinguishing between officers and employees. Germaine v. US
(1879) held that “civil surgeons” (doctors hired to perform various physical exams) were mere employees because their
duties were “occasional or temporary” rather than “continuing and permanent … ” Stressing “ideas of tenure [and] dura-
tion,” the Court there made clear that an individual must occupy a “continuing” position established by law to qualify as
an officer. Buckley v. Valeo (1976) then set out another requirement, central to this case. It determined that members of
a federal commission were officers only after finding that they “exercis[ed] significant authority pursuant to the laws of
the United States … ” The inquiry thus focused on the extent of power an individual wields in carrying out his assigned
functions.
Both the amicus and the Government urge us to elaborate on Buckley’s “significant authority” test, but another of our
precedents makes that project unnecessary … [I]n Freytag v. Commissioner, (1991), we applied the unadorned “signifi-
cant authority” test to adjudicative officials who are near-carbon copies of the Commission’s ALJs. As we now explain,
our analysis there (sans any more detailed legal criteria) necessarily decides this case.
The officials at issue in Freytag were the “special trial judges” (STJs) of the United States Tax Court. The authority of
those judges depended on the significance of the tax dispute before them. In “comparatively narrow and minor matters,”
they could both hear and definitively resolve a case for the Tax Court … In more major matters, they could preside over
the hearing, but could not issue the final decision; instead, they were to “prepare proposed findings and an opinion” for
a regular Tax Court judge to consider …
81 | APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS
This Court held that the Tax Court’s STJs are officers, not mere employees. Citing Germaine, the Court first found that
STJs hold a continuing office established by law … They serve on an ongoing, rather than a “temporary [or] episodic[,]
basis”; and their “duties, salary, and means of appointment” are all specified in the Tax Code.
For all the reasons we have given, and all those Freytag gave before, the Commission’s ALJs are “Officers of the United
States,” subject to the Appointments Clause … This Court has held that “one who makes a timely challenge to the con-
stitutional validity of the appointment of an officer who adjudicates his case” is entitled to relief. Ryder v. United States,
(1995). Lucia made just such a timely challenge: He contested the validity of Judge Elliot’s appointment before the Com-
mission, and continued pressing that claim in the Court of Appeals and this Court. So what relief follows? This Court
has also held that the “appropriate” remedy for an adjudication tainted with an appointments violation is a new “hearing
before a properly appointed” official … And we add today one thing more. That official cannot be Judge Elliot, even if
he has by now received (or receives sometime in the future) a constitutional appointment. Judge Elliot has already both
heard Lucia’s case and issued an initial decision on the merits. He cannot be expected to consider the matter as though
he had not adjudicated it before. To cure the constitutional error, another ALJ (or the Commission itself) must hold the
new hearing to which Lucia is entitled.
We accordingly reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand the case for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
Note: In June of 2020, Lucia entered a settlement with the SEC which banned Lucia from the securities industry, though
he could reapply for admittance, and included a fine of $25,000.00. (see https://www.investmentnews.com/sec-ray-lucia-
settle-lawsuit-194238, last accessed on April 27, 2023.)
§
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL POWERS | 82
Executive Privilege
United States v. Nixon
418 U.S. 683 (1974)
Decision: Affirmed
Vote: 8-0
Majority: Burger, joined by Douglas, Brennan, Stewart, White, Marshall, Blackmun, and Powell
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court.
This litigation presents for review the denial of a motion … to quash a third-party subpoena duces tecum issued … pur-
suant to Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 17 (c). The subpoena directed the President to produce certain tape recordings and doc-
uments relating to his conversations with aides and advisers …
On March 1, 1974, a grand jury of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia returned an indictment
charging seven named individuals with various offenses, including conspiracy to defraud the United States and to
obstruct justice. Although he was not designated as such in the indictment, the grand jury named the President, among
others, as an unindicted coconspirator …
[W]e turn to the claim that the subpoena should be quashed because it demands “confidential conversations between a
President and his close advisors that it would be inconsistent with the public interest to produce … ” The first contention
is a broad claim that the separation of powers doctrine precludes judicial review of a President’s claim of privilege. The
second contention is that if he does not prevail on the claim of absolute privilege, the court should hold as a matter of
constitutional law that the privilege prevails over the subpoena duces tecum.
In the performance of assigned constitutional duties each branch of the Government must initially interpret the Consti-
tution, and the interpretation of its powers by any branch is due great respect from the others. The President’s counsel,
as we have noted, reads the Constitution as providing an absolute privilege of confidentiality for all Presidential commu-
nications. Many decisions of this Court, however, have unequivocally reaffirmed the holding of Marbury v. Madison,
(1803), that “[i]t is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is … ”
Since this Court has consistently exercised the power to construe and delineate claims arising under express powers, it
must follow that the Court has authority to interpret claims with respect to powers alleged to derive from enumerated
powers …
Our system of government “requires that federal courts on occasion interpret the Constitution in a manner at variance
with the construction given the document by another branch.” Powell v. McCormack, (1969) … And in Baker v. Carr
(1961), the Court stated:
83 | EXECUTIVE PRIVILEGE
“Deciding whether a matter has in any measure been committed by the Constitution to another branch of government,
or whether the action of that branch exceeds whatever authority has been committed, is itself a delicate exercise in con-
stitutional interpretation, and is a responsibility of this Court as ultimate interpreter of the Constitution.”
Notwithstanding the deference each branch must accord the others, the “judicial Power of the United States” vested in
the federal courts by Art. III, § 1, of the Constitution can no more be shared with the Executive Branch than the Chief
Executive, for example, can share with the Judiciary the veto power, or the Congress share with the Judiciary the power to
override a Presidential veto. Any other conclusion would be contrary to the basic concept of separation of powers and the
checks and balances that flow from the scheme of a tripartite government … We therefore reaffirm that it is the province
and duty of this Court “to say what the law is” with respect to the claim of privilege presented in this case.
In support of his claim of absolute privilege, the President’s counsel urges two grounds, one of which is common to all
governments and one of which is peculiar to our system of separation of powers. The first ground is the valid need for
protection of communications between high Government officials and those who advise and assist them in the perfor-
mance of their manifold duties; the importance of this confidentiality is too plain to require further discussion …
The second ground asserted by the President’s counsel in support of the claim of absolute privilege rests on the doctrine
of separation of powers. Here it is argued that the independence of the Executive Branch within its own sphere … insu-
lates a President from a judicial subpoena in an ongoing criminal prosecution, and thereby protects confidential Presi-
dential communications.
However, neither the doctrine of separation of powers, nor the need for confidentiality of high-level communications,
without more, can sustain an absolute, unqualified Presidential privilege of immunity from judicial process under all cir-
cumstances. The President’s need for complete candor and objectivity from advisers calls for great deference from the
courts … [W]e find it difficult to accept the argument that even the very important interest in confidentiality of Presi-
dential communications is significantly diminished by production of such material for in camera inspection with all the
protection that a district court will be obliged to provide.
The impediment that an absolute, unqualified privilege would place in the way of the primary constitutional duty of the
Judicial Branch to do justice in criminal prosecutions would plainly conflict with the function of the courts under Art.
III. In designing the structure of our Government and dividing and allocating the sovereign power among three co-equal
branches, the Framers of the Constitution sought to provide a comprehensive system, but the separate powers were not
intended to operate with absolute independence …
To read the Art. II powers of the President as providing an absolute privilege as against a subpoena essential to enforce-
ment of criminal statutes on no more than a generalized claim of the public interest in confidentiality of nonmilitary and
nondiplomatic discussions would upset the constitutional balance of “a workable government” and gravely impair the
role of the courts under Art. III.
Since we conclude that the legitimate needs of the judicial process may outweigh Presidential privilege, it is necessary to
resolve those competing interests in a manner that preserves the essential functions of each branch. The right and indeed
the duty to resolve that question does not free the Judiciary from according high respect to the representations made on
behalf of the President …
EXECUTIVE PRIVILEGE | 84
When he signed the Act into law, President George W. Bush issued a statement declaring his position that § 214 would,
“if construed as mandatory rather than advisory, impermissibly interfere with the President’s constitutional authority
to formulate the position of the United States, speak for the Nation in international affairs, and determine the terms
on which recognition is given to foreign states … ” The President concluded, “U.S. policy regarding Jerusalem has not
changed … ”
In considering claims of Presidential power this Court refers to Justice Jackson’s familiar tripartite framework
from Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, (1952) (concurring opinion) … [W]hen “the President takes measures
incompatible with the expressed or implied will of Congress … he can rely only upon his own constitutional powers
minus any constitutional powers of Congress over the matter.” To succeed in this third category, the President’s asserted
power must be both “exclusive” and “conclusive” on the issue …
In this case the Secretary contends that § 214(d) infringes on the President’s exclusive recognition power by “requiring
the President to contradict his recognition position regarding Jerusalem in official communications with foreign sover-
eigns.” In so doing the Secretary acknowledges the President’s power is “at its lowest ebb … ” Because the President’s
refusal to implement § 214(d) falls into Justice Jackson’s third category, his claim must be “scrutinized with caution,”
and he may rely solely on powers the Constitution grants to him alone …
Recognition is a “formal acknowledgment” that a particular “entity possesses the qualifications for statehood” or “that
a particular regime is the effective government of a state … ” Recognition is often effected by an express “written or oral
declaration … ” It may also be implied—for example, by concluding a bilateral treaty or by sending or receiving diplo-
matic agents …
Despite the importance of the recognition power in foreign relations, the Constitution does not use the term “recogni-
tion,” either in Article II or elsewhere. The Secretary asserts that the President exercises the recognition power based on
the Reception Clause, which directs that the President “shall receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers.” Art. II, §
3. As Zivotofsky notes, the Reception Clause received little attention at the Constitutional Convention …
At the time of the founding, however, prominent international scholars suggested that receiving an ambassador was tan-
tamount to recognizing the sovereignty of the sending state … It is a logical and proper inference, then, that a Clause
directing the President alone to receive ambassadors would be understood to acknowledge his power to recognize other
nations …
The inference that the President exercises the recognition power is further supported by his additional Article II powers.
It is for the President, “by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate,” to “make Treaties, provided two thirds of the
Senators present concur.” Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. In addition, “he shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of
the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors” as well as “other public Ministers and Consuls.”
As a matter of constitutional structure, these additional powers give the President control over recognition decisions.
At international law, recognition may be effected by different means, but each means is dependent upon Presidential
power. In addition to receiving an ambassador, recognition may occur on “the conclusion of a bilateral treaty,” or the
“formal initiation of diplomatic relations,” including the dispatch of an ambassador … The Constitution thus assigns
the President means to effect recognition on his own initiative. Congress, by contrast, has no constitutional power that
PRESIDENTIAL POWERS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS | 146
would enable it to initiate diplomatic relations with a foreign nation. Because these specific Clauses confer the recogni-
tion power on the President, the Court need not consider whether or to what extent the Vesting Clause, which provides
that the “executive Power” shall be vested in the President, provides further support for the President’s action here. Art.
II, § 1, cl. 1.
The text and structure of the Constitution grant the President the power to recognize foreign nations and governments.
The question then becomes whether that power is exclusive. The various ways in which the President may unilaterally
effect recognition—and the lack of any similar power vested in Congress—suggest that it is. So, too, do functional con-
siderations. Put simply, the Nation must have a single policy regarding which governments are legitimate in the eyes of
the United States and which are not. Foreign countries need to know, before entering into diplomatic relations or com-
merce with the United States, whether their ambassadors will be received; whether their officials will be immune from
suit in federal court; and whether they may initiate lawsuits here to vindicate their rights. These assurances cannot be
equivocal …
It remains true, of course, that many decisions affecting foreign relations—including decisions that may determine the
course of our relations with recognized countries—require congressional action. Congress may “regulate Commerce
with foreign Nations,” “establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization,” “define and punish Piracies and Felonies commit-
ted on the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations,” “declare War,” “grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal,”
and “make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces … ”
Although the President alone effects the formal act of recognition, Congress’ powers, and its central role in making laws,
give it substantial authority regarding many of the policy determinations that precede and follow the act of recognition
itself. If Congress disagrees with the President’s recognition policy, there may be consequences. Formal recognition may
seem a hollow act if it is not accompanied by the dispatch of an ambassador, the easing of trade restrictions, and the con-
clusion of treaties. And those decisions require action by the Senate or the whole Congress.
In practice, then, the President’s recognition determination is just one part of a political process that may require Con-
gress to make laws. The President’s exclusive recognition power encompasses the authority to acknowledge, in a formal
sense, the legitimacy of other states and governments, including their territorial bounds. Albeit limited, the exclusive
recognition power is essential to the conduct of Presidential duties. The formal act of recognition is an executive power
that Congress may not qualify. If the President is to be effective in negotiations over a formal recognition determination,
it must be evident to his counterparts abroad that he speaks for the Nation on that precise question …
Here, history is not all on one side, but on balance it provides strong support for the conclusion that the recognition
power is the President’s alone. As Zivotofsky argues, certain historical incidents can be interpreted to support the posi-
tion that recognition is a shared power. But the weight of historical evidence supports the opposite view, which is that
the formal determination of recognition is a power to be exercised only by the President …
As the power to recognize foreign states resides in the President alone, the question becomes whether § 214(d) infringes
on the Executive’s consistent decision to withhold recognition with respect to Jerusalem …
Section 214(d) requires that, in a passport or consular report of birth abroad, “the Secretary shall, upon the request of
the citizen or the citizen’s legal guardian, record the place of birth as Israel” for a “United States citizen born in the city
147 | PRESIDENTIAL POWERS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS
of Jerusalem.” That is, § 214(d) requires the President, through the Secretary, to identify citizens born in Jerusalem who
so request as being born in Israel. But according to the President, those citizens were not born in Israel. As a matter
of United States policy, neither Israel nor any other country is acknowledged as having sovereignty over Jerusalem. In
this way, § 214(d) “directly contradicts” the “carefully calibrated and longstanding Executive branch policy of neutrality
toward Jerusalem.”
If the power over recognition is to mean anything, it must mean that the President not only makes the initial, formal
recognition determination but also that he may maintain that determination in his and his agent’s statements. This con-
clusion is a matter of both common sense and necessity. If Congress could command the President to state a recognition
position inconsistent with his own, Congress could override the President’s recognition determination …
Although the statement required by § 214(d) would not itself constitute a formal act of recognition, it is a mandate that
the Executive contradict his prior recognition determination in an official document issued by the Secretary of State …
As a result, it is unconstitutional. This is all the more clear in light of the longstanding treatment of a passport’s place-
of-birth section as an official executive statement implicating recognition … The Secretary’s position on this point has
been consistent: He will not place information in the place-of-birth section of a passport that contradicts the President’s
recognition policy … If a citizen objects to the country listed as sovereign over his place of birth, then the Secretary will
accommodate him by listing the city or town of birth rather than the country … But the Secretary will not list a sovereign
that contradicts the President’s recognition policy in a passport. Thus, the Secretary will not list “Israel” in a passport as
the country containing Jerusalem …
From the face of § 214, from the legislative history, and from its reception, it is clear that Congress wanted to express its
displeasure with the President’s policy by, among other things, commanding the Executive to contradict his own, earlier
stated position on Jerusalem. This Congress may not do.
It is true, as Zivotofsky notes, that Congress has substantial authority over passports … The Court does not question the
power of Congress to enact passport legislation of wide scope …
The problem with § 214(d), however, lies in how Congress exercised its authority over passports. It was an improper act
for Congress to “aggrandiz[e] its power at the expense of another branch” by requiring the President to contradict an ear-
lier recognition determination in an official document issued by the Executive Branch. Freytag v. Commissioner, (1991).
To allow Congress to control the President’s communication in the context of a formal recognition determination is to
allow Congress to exercise that exclusive power itself. As a result, the statute is unconstitutional …
In holding § 214(d) invalid the Court does not question the substantial powers of Congress over foreign affairs in general
or passports in particular. This case is confined solely to the exclusive power of the President to control recognition deter-
minations, including formal statements by the Executive Branch acknowledging the legitimacy of a state or government
and its territorial bounds. Congress cannot command the President to contradict an earlier recognition determination in
the issuance of passports.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit is
Affirmed.
PRESIDENTIAL POWERS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS | 148
Excerpted by Alexandria Metzdorf
Justice Scalia, with whom The Chief Justice and Justice Alito join, dissenting.
Before this country declared independence, the law of England entrusted the King with the exclusive care of his king-
dom’s foreign affairs. The royal prerogative included the “sole power of sending ambassadors to foreign states, and receiv-
ing them at home,” the sole authority to “make treaties, leagues, and alliances with foreign states and princes,” “the sole
prerogative of making war and peace,” and the “sole power of raising and regulating fleets and armies.” W. Blackstone,
Commentaries. The People of the United States had other ideas when they organized our Government. They considered
a sound structure of balanced powers essential to the preservation of just government, and international relations formed
no exception to that principle.
The People therefore adopted a Constitution that divides responsibility for the Nation’s foreign concerns between the
legislative and executive departments. The Constitution gave the President the “executive Power,” authority to send and
responsibility to receive ambassadors, power to make treaties, and command of the Army and Navy—though they qual-
ified some of these powers by requiring consent of the Senate. Art. II, §§1–3. At the same time, they gave Congress pow-
ers over war, foreign commerce, naturalization, and more. Art. I, §8. “Fully eleven of the powers that Article I, §8 grants
Congress deal in some way with foreign affairs.” L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law, §5–18, p. 965.
This case arises out of a dispute between the Executive and Legislative Branches about whether the United States should
treat Jerusalem as a part of Israel. The Constitution contemplates that the political branches will make policy about the
territorial claims of foreign nations the same way they make policy about other international matters: The President will
exercise his powers on the basis of his views, Congress its powers on the basis of its views. That is just what has happened
here.
The political branches of our Government agree on the real-world fact that Israel controls the city of Jerusalem … They
disagree, however, about how official documents should record the birthplace of an American citizen born in Jerusalem.
The Executive does not accept any state’s claim to sovereignty over Jerusalem, and it maintains that the birthplace des-
ignation “Israel” would clash with this stance of neutrality. But the National Legislature has enacted a statute that pro-
vides: “For purposes of the registration of birth, certification of nationality, or issuance of a passport of a United States
citizen born in the city of Jerusalem, the Secretary [of State] shall, upon the request of the citizen or the citizen’s legal
guardian, record the place of birth as Israel.” Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 2003, §214(d). Menachem
Zivotofsky’s parents seek enforcement of this statutory right in the issuance of their son’s passport and consular report
of birth abroad …
Before turning to Presidential power under Article II, I think it well to establish the statute’s basis in congressional power
under Article I. Congress’s power to “establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization,” Art. I, §8, cl. 4, enables it to grant
American citizenship to someone born abroad. United States v. Wong Kim Ark., (1898). The naturalization power also
enables Congress to furnish the people it makes citizens with papers verifying their citizenship—say a consular report of
birth abroad (which certifies citizenship of an American born outside the United States) or a passport (which certifies cit-
izenship for purposes of international travel). As the Necessary and Proper Clause confirms, every congressional power
149 | PRESIDENTIAL POWERS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS
“carries with it all those incidental powers which are necessary to its complete and effectual execution.” Cohens v. Vir-
ginia, (1821). Even on a miserly understanding of Congress’s incidental authority, Congress may make grants of citizen-
ship “effectual” by providing for the issuance of certificates authenticating them.
One would think that if Congress may grant Zivotofsky a passport and a birth report, it may also require these papers to
record his birthplace as “Israel.” …
No doubt congressional discretion in executing legislative powers has its limits; Congress’s chosen approach must be not
only “necessary” to carrying its powers into execution, but also “proper.” Congress thus may not transcend boundaries
upon legislative authority stated or implied elsewhere in the Constitution. But as we shall see, §214(d) does not transgress
any such restriction.
The Court frames this case as a debate about recognition. Recognition is a sovereign’s official acceptance of a status under
international law …
To know all this is to realize at once that §214(d) has nothing to do with recognition. Section 214(d) does not require the
Secretary to make a formal declaration about Israel’s sovereignty over Jerusalem. And nobody suggests that international
custom infers acceptance of sovereignty from the birthplace designation on a passport or birth report, as it does from
bilateral treaties or exchanges of ambassadors. Recognition would preclude the United States (as a matter of international
law) from later contesting Israeli sovereignty over Jerusalem. But making a notation in a passport or birth report does not
encumber the Republic with any international obligations. It leaves the Nation free (so far as international law is con-
cerned) to change its mind in the future. That would be true even if the statute required all passports to list “Israel.” But
in fact it requires only those passports to list “Israel” for which the citizen (or his guardian) requests “Israel”; all the rest,
under the Secretary’s policy, list “Jerusalem.” It is utterly impossible for this deference to private requests to constitute an
act that unequivocally manifests an intention to grant recognition.
…
The best indication that §214(d) does not concern recognition comes from the State Department’s policies concerning
Taiwan. According to the Solicitor General, the United States “acknowledges the Chinese position” that Taiwan is a part
of China, but “does not take a position” of its own on that issue. Brief for Respondent 51–52. Even so, the State Depart-
ment has for a long time recorded the birthplace of a citizen born in Taiwan as “China.” It indeed insisted on doing so
until Congress passed a law (on which §214(d) was modeled) giving citizens the option to have their birthplaces recorded
as “Taiwan.” The Solicitor General explains that the designation “China” “involves a geographic description, not an asser-
tion that Taiwan is … part of sovereign China.” Brief for Respondent 51–52. Quite so. Section 214(d) likewise calls for
nothing beyond a “geographic description”; it does not require the Executive even to assert, never mind formally recog-
nize, that Jerusalem is a part of sovereign Israel …
Even if the Constitution gives the President sole power to extend recognition, it does not give him sole power to make
all decisions relating to foreign disputes over sovereignty. To the contrary, a fair reading of Article I allows Congress to
decide for itself how its laws should handle these controversies …
PRESIDENTIAL POWERS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS | 150
The Constitution likewise does not give the President exclusive power to determine which claims to statehood and terri-
tory “are legitimate in the eyes of the United States,” ante, at 11. Congress may express its own views about these matters
by declaring war, restricting trade, denying foreign aid, and much else besides …
No consistent or coherent theory supports the Court’s decision …
International disputes about statehood and territory are neither rare nor obscure. Leading foreign debates during the
19th century concerned how the United States should respond to revolutions in Latin America, Texas, Mexico, Hawaii,
Cuba. During the 20th century, attitudes toward Communist governments in Russia and China became conspicuous
subjects of agitation. Disagreements about Taiwan, Kashmir, and Crimea remain prominent today. A President empow-
ered to decide all questions relating to these matters, immune from laws embodying congressional disagreement with his
position, would have un- controlled mastery of a vast share of the Nation’s foreign affairs.
That is not the chief magistrate under which the American People agreed to live when they adopted the national charter.
They believed that “[t]he accumulation of all powers, legislative, executive, and judiciary, in the same hands, … may justly
be pronounced the very definition of tyranny.” The Federalist No. 47, p. 301 (Madison). For this reason, they did not
entrust either the President or Congress with sole power to adopt uncontradictable policies about any subject—foreign-
sovereignty disputes included. They instead gave each political department its own powers, and with that the freedom to
contradict the other’s policies. Under the Constitution they approved, Congress may require Zivotofsky’s passport and
birth report to record his birthplace as Israel, even if that requirement clashes with the President’s preference for neutral-
ity about the status of Jerusalem.
I dissent.
Excerpted by Rorie Solberg
§
Trump v. Hawaii
585 U.S. ___ (2018)
Decision: Reversed and remanded
Vote: 5-4
Majority: Roberts, joined by Kennedy, Thomas, Alito, and Gorsuch
Concurrence: Kennedy
Concurrence: Thomas
Dissent: Breyer, joined by Kagan
Dissent: Sotomayor, joined by Ginsburg
Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the Court.
151 | PRESIDENTIAL POWERS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, foreign nationals seeking entry into the United States undergo a vetting
process to ensure that they satisfy the numerous requirements for admission. The Act also vests the President with
authority to restrict the entry of aliens when- ever he finds that their entry “would be detrimental to the interests of the
United States.” 8 U. S. C. §1182(f). Relying on that delegation, the President concluded that it was necessary to impose
entry restrictions on nationals of countries that do not share adequate information for an informed entry determination,
or that otherwise present national security risks. Presidential Proclamation No. 9645 (Proclamation). The plaintiffs in
this litigation, respondents here, challenged the application of those entry restrictions to certain aliens abroad. We now
decide whether the President had authority under the Act to issue the Proclamation, and whether the entry policy vio-
lates the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment …
DHS collected and evaluated data regarding all foreign governments. §1(d). It identified 16 countries as having deficient
information-sharing practices and presenting national security concerns, and another 31 countries as “at risk” of similarly
failing to meet the baseline. §1(e). The State Department then undertook diplomatic efforts over a 50-day period to
encourage all foreign governments to improve their practices. §1(f ). As a result of that effort, numerous countries pro-
vided DHS with travel document exemplars and agreed to share information on known or suspected terrorists.
Following the 50-day period, the Acting Secretary of Homeland Security concluded that eight countries—Chad, Iran,
Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Syria, Venezuela, and Yemen—remained deficient in terms of their risk profile and willingness
to provide requested information. The Acting Secretary recommended that the President impose entry restrictions on
certain nationals from all of those countries except Iraq …
Plaintiffs challenged the Proclamation—except as applied to North Korea and Venezuela—on several grounds. As rele-
vant here, they argued that the Proclamation contravenes provisions in the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) …
Plaintiffs further claimed that the Proclamation violates the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, because it
was motivated not by concerns pertaining to national security but by animus toward Islam …
The INA establishes numerous grounds on which an alien abroad may be inadmissible to the United States and ineligible
for a visa … Congress has also delegated to the President authority to suspend or restrict the entry of aliens in certain cir-
cumstances. The principal source of that authority, §1182(f ), enables the President to “suspend the entry of all aliens or
any class of aliens” whenever he “finds” that their entry “would be detrimental to the interests of the United States.”
Plaintiffs argue that the Proclamation is not a valid exercise of the President’s authority under the INA. In their
view, §1182(f ) confers only a residual power to temporarily halt the entry of a discrete group of aliens engaged in
harmful conduct. They also assert that the Proclamation violates another provision of the INA— 8 U. S. C.
§1152(a)(1)(A)—because it discriminates on the basis of nationality in the issuance of immigrant visas …
§1182(f ) exudes deference to the President in every clause. It entrusts to the President the decisions whether and when to
suspend entry … whose entry to suspend … for how long … and on what conditions … It is therefore unsurprising that we
have previously observed that §1182(f ) vests the President with “ample power” to impose entry restrictions in addition
to those elsewhere enumerated in the INA …
The Proclamation falls well within this comprehensive delegation. The sole prerequisite set forth in §1182(f ) is that
the President “find[ ]” that the entry of the covered aliens “would be detrimental to the interests of the United States.”
PRESIDENTIAL POWERS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS | 152
The President has undoubtedly fulfilled that requirement here … The Proclamation therefore “craft[ed] … country-spe-
cific restrictions that would be most likely to encourage cooperation given each country’s distinct circumstances,” while
securing the Nation “until such time as improvements occur.”
Plaintiffs … argue, as an initial matter, that the Proclamation fails to provide a persuasive rationale for why nationality
alone renders the covered foreign nationals a security risk. And they further discount the President’s stated concern about
deficient vetting because the Proclamation allows many aliens from the designated countries to enter on nonimmigrant
visas.
Such arguments are grounded on the premise that §1182(f ) not only requires the President to make a finding that
entry “would be detrimental to the interests of the United States,” but also to explain that finding with sufficient detail
to enable judicial review. That premise is questionable. But even assuming that some form of review is appropriate,
plaintiffs’ attacks on the sufficiency of the President’s findings cannot be sustained. The 12-page Proclamation—which
thoroughly describes the process, agency evaluations, and recommendations underlying the President’s chosen restric-
tions—is more detailed than any prior order a President has issued under §1182(f ) …
Like its predecessors, the Proclamation makes clear that its “conditional restrictions” will remain in force only so long
as necessary to “address” the identified “inadequacies and risks” within the covered nations … To that end, the Procla-
mation establishes an ongoing process to engage covered nations and assess every 180 days whether the entry restrictions
should be modified or terminated. §§4(a), (b). Indeed, after the initial review period, the President determined that Chad
had made sufficient improvements to its identity-management protocols, and he accordingly lifted the entry suspension
on its nationals …
In short, the language of §1182(f ) is clear, and the Proclamation does not exceed any textual limit on the President’s
authority …
Plaintiffs’ structural argument starts with the premise that §1182(f ) does not give the President authority to counter-
mand Congress’s considered policy judgments. The President, they say, may supplement the INA, but he cannot sup-
plant it …
We may assume that §1182(f ) does not allow the President to expressly override particular provisions of the INA. But
plaintiffs have not identified any conflict between the statute and the Proclamation that would implicitly bar the Presi-
dent from addressing deficiencies in the Nation’s vetting system …
Plaintiffs suggest that the entry restrictions are unnecessary because consular officers can simply deny visas in individual
cases when an alien fails to carry his burden of proving admissibility—for example, by failing to produce certified records
regarding his criminal history. But that misses the point: A critical finding of the Proclamation is that the failure of
certain countries to provide reliable information prevents the Government from accurately determining whether an alien
is inadmissible or poses a threat. Proclamation §1(h). Unless consular officers are expected to apply categorical rules and
deny entry from those countries across the board, fraudulent or unreliable documentation may thwart their review in
individual cases. And at any rate, the INA certainly does not require that systemic problems such as the lack of reliable States, and of compounding the American people into one common mass. Of consequence, when they act, they act in
their States. But the measures they adopt do not, on that account, cease to be the measures of the people themselves, or
become the measures of the State governments …
The assent of the States in their sovereign capacity is implied in calling a convention, and thus submitting that instrument
to the people. But the people were at perfect liberty to accept or reject it, and their act was final. It required not the affir-
mance, and could not be negatived, by the State Governments. The Constitution, when thus adopted, was of complete
obligation, and bound the State sovereignties …
From these conventions, the Constitution derives its whole authority. The government proceeds directly from the peo-
ple; is ‘ordained and established,’ in the name of the people; and is declared to be ordained, ‘in order to form a more
perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, and secure the blessings of liberty to themselves and to their
posterity.’ The assent of the states, in their sovereign capacity, is implied, in calling a convention, and thus submitting that
instrument to the people. But the people were at perfect liberty to accept or reject it; and their act was final. It required
not the affirmance, and could not be negatived, by the state governments. The constitution, when thus adopted, was of
complete obligation, and bound the state sovereignties …
This government is acknowledged by all, to be one of enumerated powers. The principle, that it can exercise only the
powers granted to it, would seem too apparent, to have required to be enforced by all those arguments, which its enlight-
ened friends, while it was depending before the people, found it necessary to urge; that principle is now universally
admitted. But the question respecting the extent of the powers actually granted, is perpetually arising, and will probably
continue to arise, so long as our system shall exist …
[T]he government of the Union, though limited in its powers, is supreme within its sphere of action. This would seem
to result, necessarily, from its nature. It is the government of all; its powers are delegated by all; it represents all, and acts
for all. Though any one state may be willing to control its operations, no state is willing to allow others to control them.
The nation, on those subjects on which it can act, must necessarily bind its component parts. But this question is not left
to mere reason: the people have, in express terms, decided it …
Among the enumerated powers, we do not find that of establishing a bank or creating a corporation. But there is no
phrase in the instrument which, like the articles of confederation, excludes incidental or implied powers; and which
requires that everything granted shall be expressly and minutely described … A constitution, to contain an accurate detail
of all the subdivisions of which its great powers will admit, and of all the means by which they may be carried into exe-
cution, would partake of the prolixity of a legal code, and could scarcely be embraced by the human mind. It would,
probably, never be understood by the public. Its nature, therefore, requires, that only its great outlines should be marked,
its important objects designated, and the minor ingredients which compose those objects, be deduced from the nature
of the objects themselves. That this idea was entertained by the framers of the American constitution, is not only to be
inferred from the nature of the instrument, but from the language. Why else were some of the limitations, found in the
9th section of the 1st article, introduced? It is also, in some degree, warranted, by their having omitted to use any restric-
tive term which might prevent its receiving a fair and just interpretation …
161 | SOURCES AND SCOPE OF LEGISLATIVE POWERS
Although, among the enumerated powers of government, we do not find the word ‘bank’ or ‘incorporation,’ we find the
great powers, to lay and collect taxes; to borrow money; to regulate commerce; to declare and conduct a war; and to raise
and support armies and navies. The sword and the purse, all the external relations, and no inconsiderable portion of the
industry of the nation, are intrusted to its government.
It is not denied, that the powers given to the government imply the ordinary means of execution. That, for example, of
raising revenue, and applying it to national purposes, is admitted to imply the power of conveying money from place to
place, as the exigencies of the nation may require, and of employing the usual means of conveyance. But it is denied, that
the government … may … erect a corporation. On what foundation does this argument rest? On this alone: the power of
creating a corporation, is one appertaining to sovereignty, and is not expressly conferred on congress. This is true. But all
legislative powers appertain to sovereignty. The original power of giving the law on any subject whatever, is a sovereign
power … if the government of the Union is restrained from creating a corporation … on the single reason that the creation
of a corporation is an act of sovereignty … there would be some difficulty in sustaining the authority of congress to pass
other laws for the accomplishment of the same objects. The government which has a right to do an act, and has imposed
on it, the duty of performing that act, must, according to the dictates of reason, be allowed to select the means … those
who contend that it may not … take upon themselves the burden of establishing that exception …
In America, the powers of sovereignty are divided between the government of the Union, and those of the states. They
are each sovereign, with respect to the objects committed to it, and neither sovereign, with respect to the objects commit-
ted to the other … Some state constitutions were formed before, some since that of the United States. We cannot believe,
that their relation to each other is in any degree dependent upon this circumstance. Their respective powers must, we
think, be precisely the same, as if they had been formed at the same time …
To [Congress’] enumeration of powers is added, that of making ‘all laws which shall be necessary and proper, for carrying
into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this constitution, in the government of the United
States, or in any department thereof.’ The counsel for the state of Maryland have urged various arguments, to prove that
this clause, though, in terms, a grant of power, is not so, in effect; but is really restrictive of the general right, which might
otherwise be implied, of selecting means for executing the enumerated powers. In support of this proposition, they have
found it necessary to contend, that this clause was inserted for the purpose of conferring on congress the power of mak-
ing laws. That, without it, doubts might be entertained, whether congress could exercise its powers in the form of legis-
lation …
Could it be necessary to say, that a legislature should exercise legislative powers, in the shape of legislation? After allowing
each house to prescribe its own course of proceeding, after describing the manner in which a bill should become a law,
would it have entered into the mind of a single member of the convention, that an express power to make laws was neces-
sary, to enable the legislature to make them? That a legislature, endowed with legislative powers, can legislate, is a propo-
sition too self-evident to have been questioned …
But the argument which most conclusively demonstrates the error of the construction contended for by the counsel for
the state of Maryland, is founded on the intention of the convention, as manifested in the whole clause. To waste time
and argument in proving that, without it, congress might carry its powers into execution, would be not much less idle,
than to hold a lighted taper to the sun. As little can it be required to prove, that in the absence of this clause, congress
SOURCES AND SCOPE OF LEGISLATIVE POWERS | 162
would have some choice of means … This clause, as construed by the state of Maryland, would abridge, and almost anni-
hilate, this useful and necessary right of the legislature to select its means. That this could not be intended, is, we should
think, had it not been already controverted, too apparent for controversy.
We think so for the following reasons:
1st. The clause is placed among the powers of Congress, not among the limitations on those powers.
2d. Its terms purport to enlarge, not to diminish, the powers vested in the Government. It purports to be an additional
power, not a restriction on those already granted. No reason has been or can be assigned for thus concealing an intention
to narrow the discretion of the National Legislature under words which purport to enlarge it. The framers of the Con-
stitution wished its adoption, and well knew that it would be endangered by its strength, not by its weakness. Had they
been capable of using language which would convey to the eye one idea and, after deep reflection, impress on the mind
another, they would rather have disguised the grant of power than its limitation. If, then, their intention had been, by
this clause, to restrain the free use of means which might otherwise have been implied, that intention would have been
inserted in another place, and would have been expressed in terms resembling these. “In carrying into execution the fore-
going powers, and all others,” &c., “no laws shall be passed but such as are necessary and proper.” Had the intention been
to make this clause restrictive, it would unquestionably have been so in form, as well as in effect.
The result of the most careful and attentive consideration bestowed upon this clause is that, if it does not enlarge, it can-
not be construed to restrain, the powers of Congress, or to impair the right of the legislature to exercise its best judgment
in the selection of measures to carry into execution the Constitutional powers of the Government. If no other motive for
its insertion can be suggested, a sufficient one is found in the desire to remove all doubts respecting the right to legislate
on that vast mass of incidental powers which must be involved in the Constitution if that instrument be not a splendid
bauble.
We admit, as all must admit, that the powers of the Government are limited, and that its limits are not to be transcended.
But we think the sound construction of the Constitution must allow to the national legislature that discretion with
respect to the means by which the powers it confers are to be carried into execution which will enable that body to per-
form the high duties assigned to it in the manner most beneficial to the people. Let the end be legitimate, let it be within
the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not
prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are Constitutional …
After the most deliberate consideration, it is the unanimous and decided opinion of this Court that the act to incorporate
the Bank of the United States is a law made in pursuance of the Constitution, and is a part of the supreme law of the
land.
The branches, proceeding from the same stock and being conducive to the complete accomplishment of the object, are
equally constitutional …
It being the opinion of the Court that the act incorporating the bank is constitutional, and that the power of establishing
a branch in the State of Maryland might be properly exercised by the bank itself, we proceed to inquire:
163 | SOURCES AND SCOPE OF LEGISLATIVE POWERS
2. Whether the State of Maryland may, without violating the Constitution, tax that branch? [See McCulloch v.
Maryland in the Federalism chapter.]
Excerpted by Alexandria Metzdorf
§
Chae Chan Ping v. United States
130 U.S. 581 (1889)
Decision: Affirmed
Vote: Unanimous
Majority: Field,, joined by Fuller, Miller, Bradley, Harlan, Gray, Blatchford, and Lamar
MR. JUSTICE FIELD delivered the opinion of the Court.
The appeal involves a consideration of the validity of the Act of Congress of October 1, 1888, prohibiting Chinese labor-
ers from entering the United States who had departed before its passage, having a certificate issued under the act of 1882
as amended by the act of 1884, granting them permission to return. The validity of the act is assailed as being in effect
an expulsion from the country of Chinese laborers, in violation of existing treaties between the United States and the
government of China, and of rights vested in them under the laws of Congress …
British subjects in China were often subjected not only to the violence of mobs, but to insults and outrages from local
authorities of the country, which led to retaliatory measures for the punishment of the aggressors. To such an extent were
these measures carried and such resistance offered to them that in 1856, the two countries were in open war … England
requested of the President the concurrence and active cooperation of the United States … [A]s the rights of citizens of
the United States might be seriously affected by the results of existing hostilities, and commercial intercourse between
the United States and China be disturbed, it was deemed advisable to send to China a minister plenipotentiary to repre-
sent our government and watch our interests there. Accordingly, Mr. William B. Reed, of Philadelphia, was appointed
such minister, and instructed, while abstaining from any direct interference, to aid by peaceful cooperation the objects
the allied forces were seeking to accomplish … Through him a new treaty was negotiated with the Chinese government.
It was concluded in June, 1858, and ratified in August of the following year …
[A]dditional articles to the treaty of 1858 were agreed upon which gave expression to the general desire that the two
nations and their peoples should be drawn closer together. The new articles, eight in number, were agreed to on the 28th
of July, 1868, and ratifications of them were exchanged at Pekin in November of the following year …
“ARTICLE VI. Citizens of the United States visiting or residing in China shall enjoy the same privileges, immunities,
or exemptions in respect to travel or residence as may there be enjoyed by the citizens or subjects of the most favored
nation, and reciprocally, Chinese subjects visiting or residing in the United shall enjoy the same privileges, immunities,
SOURCES AND SCOPE OF LEGISLATIVE POWERS | 164
and exemptions in respect to travel or residence as may there be enjoyed by the citizens or subjects of the most favored
nation. But nothing herein contained shall be held to confer naturalization upon citizens of the United States in China,
nor upon the subjects of China in the United States … ”
The discovery of gold in California in 1848, as is well known, was followed by a large immigration thither from all parts of
the world, attracted not only by the hope of gain from the mines, but from the great prices paid for all kinds of labor. The
news of the discovery penetrated China, and laborers came from there in great numbers, a few with their own means, but
by far the greater number under contract with employers for whose benefit they worked. These laborers readily secured
employment … They were generally industrious and frugal. Not being accompanied by families except in rare instances,
their expenses were small and they were content with the simplest fare, such as would not suffice for our laborers and
artisans. The competition between them and our people was for this reason altogether in their favor, and the consequent
irritation, proportionately deep and bitter, was followed, in many cases, by open conflicts, to the great disturbance of the
public peace.
The differences of race added greatly to the difficulties of the situation … As they grew in numbers each year, the people
of the coast saw, or believed they saw, in the facility of immigration and in the crowded millions of China, where popu-
lation presses upon the means of subsistence, great danger that at no distant day that portion of our country would be
overrun by them unless prompt action was taken to restrict their immigration. The people there accordingly petitioned
earnestly for protective legislation …
So urgent and constant were the prayers for relief against existing and anticipated evils, both from the public authorities
of the Pacific coast and from private individuals that Congress was impelled to act on the subject. Many persons, how-
ever, both in and out of Congress, were of opinion that so long as the treaty remained unmodified, legislation restricting
immigration would be a breach of faith with China. A statute was accordingly passed appropriating money to send com-
missioners to China to act with our minister there in negotiating and concluding by treaty a settlement of such matters
of interest between the two governments as might be confided to them … 


