II. PARENTING TIME/VISITATION SCHEDULES
The following schedule should not be construed as precluding other visitation or alternative arrangements. The best visitation plan is one the parties have agreed to, rather than one imposed by the Court. However, the Court will only enforce the strict terms of this Parenting Plan in the event of any future disagreements concerning visitation.
A. Parenting Time/Visitation-General
This visitation schedule is broken up into several different sections or types of visitation. Regardless of the age of the child(ren) whose custody is being addressed herein, this visitation schedule is organized to include visitation during the school year, during holidays from school and during summer. For all purposes herein, the following terms shall be applicable:
1) Visitation during school year: If the child(ren) are not enrolled in school, the published schedule of the local public school where the primary custodian resides shall be utilized. If the child(ren) are enrolled in school, the schedule of the school system in which the child(ren) is/are actually enrolled shall be utilized. In the event there is more than one child and the children are enrolled in schools which observe different schedules, the parties shall utilize a hybrid schedule that reflects the holidays which are common to all applicable school systems (the applicable
schedule shall be referred to as the “School Year”). This schedule may also be referred to as the “Regular Schedule” or “Day-To-Day Schedule” herein.
2) Visitation during Thanksgiving Break: This period of visitation includes the dates that the applicable school system recesses for at least two consecutive school days in November of every year (“Thanksgiving Break”). This schedule begins to be applicable at 6:00 p.m. on the date that the Thanksgiving Break begins and ends at 6:00 p.m. on the Sunday after Thanksgiving.
3) Visitation during Winter Break: This period of visitation includes the dates that the
applicable school system recesses for winter break and which includes December 25 of every year (“Winter Break”). This schedule begins to be applicable at 6:00 p.m. on the date that the Winter Break begins and ends at 6:00 p.m. on the day before school resumes.
4) Visitation during Spring Break: This period of visitation includes the dates that the
applicable school system recesses for a full week in the month of March or April of every year (“Spring Break”). This schedule begins to be applicable at 6:00 p.m. on the day that school recesses for Spring Break and ends at 6:00 p.m. on the day before school resumes.
5) Visitation during Summer: This period of visitation includes the dates that the applicable school system recesses for at least one full month in the summer and is the period between academic years (“Summer Break”). The Summer Break begins to be applicable on the day that school recesses for Summer Break and ends at 6:00 p.m. five (5) days before school resumes.
6) Weekend: For purposes of this parenting plan, a weekend begins at 6:00 p.m. on Friday and ends at 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.
7) Weekday visitation: Weekday visitation begins at 4:00 p.m. and ends at 7:30 p.m. The party with weekday visitation shall provide the child(ren)’s evening meal and complete any homework assigned for that evening.
B. Visitation during School Year: (Choose one of the following)
During the school year, the Non-Custodial Parent shall have at a minimum the following rights of parenting time/visitation (choose an item):
( ) The weekend of the first, third and fifth Friday (if any) of each month.
( ) Every other weekend starting the second weekend after the date of this plan.
Additionally, the Non-Custodial Parent shall have weekday parenting time/visitation on (choose an item):
( ) None
( ) One afternoon each week to be agreed upon by the parties. If the parties cannot
agree, weekday visitation shall be on Tuesday.
C. Visitation during Thanksgiving Break: (Choose one of the following)
( ) Applicable ( ) Not applicable, the Day-to-Day schedule applies ( ) See Paragraph XI below
_______ In even-numbered years, the Non-Custodial Parent will have the child(ren) with him/her for the entire Thanksgiving Break. In odd-numbered years, the Custodial Parent shall have the child(ren) with him/her for the entire Thanksgiving Break.
OR
_______ The ( ) Custodial Parent ( ) Non-Custodial Parent shall have the child(ren) for the first period of Thanksgiving Break, beginning at the time that school recesses for
Thanksgiving Break until 3:00 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day in (X) odd-numbered years  ( ) even-numbered years ( ) every year. The other parent will have the child(ren) for the second period of Thanksgiving Break, beginning at 3:00 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day until 6:00 p.m. on the evening before Thanksgiving Break ends. Unless otherwise indicated, the parties shall alternate the first and second periods of Thanksgiving Break each year.
D. Visitation during Winter Break: (Choose one of the following)
( ) Applicable ( ) Not applicable, the Day-to-Day schedule applies ( ) See Paragraph XI below
_______ The ( ) Custodial Parent ( ) Non-Custodial Parent shall have the child(ren) for the first period of Winter Break, beginning at the time that school recesses for Winter Break until December 26th at 10:00 a.m. in ( ) odd-numbered years ( ) even-numbered years ( ) every year. The other parent will have the child(ren) for the second period of Winter Break, beginning at 10:00 a.m. on December 26th until 6:00 p.m. on the evening before Winter Break ends. Unless otherwise indicated, the parties shall alternate the first and second periods of Winter Break each year. For the purpose of resuming visitation during the School Year, the parent who exercised visitation during the first half of Winter Break shall have the child(ren) with that parent on the first weekend following the end of Winter Break visitation. This is the only time that visitation during the School Year might be reset.
E. Visitation during Summer: (Choose one of the following)
( ) Applicable ( ) Not applicable, the day-to-day schedule applies ( ) See Paragraph XI below
Unless the parties agree otherwise, visitation with the child(ren) during the Summer Break shall be alternated on a week-to-week basis. The first week of visitation during Summer Break begins on the Sunday after school recesses for the Summer Break at 6:00 p.m. and ends on the following Sunday at 6:00 p.m. The Non-Custodial Parent shall have the first week of Summer Break visitation. The Custodial Parent shall have the next week and the parties shall continue to alternate weeks of visitation during
Summer Break thereafter. In all cases, the child(ren) shall be with the Custodial Parent for the last five consecutive days before Summer Break ends and the next School Year begins.
( ) Other: ___
F. Visitation during Spring Break: (Choose one of the following)
( ) Applicable ( ) Not applicable, the day-to-day schedule applies ( ) See Paragraph XI below
____In odd-numbered years, the Non-Custodial Parent shall have the child(ren) for Spring Break. In even-numbered years, the Custodial Parent shall have the child(ren) for the entire Spring Break.
OR _______ The parties shall divide visitation during every Spring Break. If the parties are unable to agree on visitation during the child(ren)’s spring break, the parent whose Regular Schedule of visitation would include the first weekend of Spring Break will have the child(ren) for that weekend through 12:00 noon on Wednesday. At that time, the child(ren) will be returned to the other parent who will have visitation with the child(ren) for the remainder of Spring Break.
G. Other holiday schedule:
The child(ren) shall be with Mother on every Mother’s Day from 6:00 pm on the Saturday which precedes Mother’s Day until 6:00 pm of Mother’s Day. The child(ren) shall be with Father on every Father’s Day from 6:00 pm on the Saturday which precedes Father’s Day until 6:00 pm on Father’s Day.
This schedule will be maintained, regardless of which parent the children would have been with on that particular weekend under the Regular Schedule of visitation or under the schedule of visitation applicable to Summer Break.
H. School holidays that precede or follow weekend visitation during the school year
For the purposes of this parenting plan, if the Non-Custodial Parent exercises visitation during the School Year on a weekend in which there is a Friday and/or Monday school holiday which immediately precedes and/or follows his weekend visitation, Non-Custodial Parent’s visitation shall include that Friday and/or
Monday school holiday (“Holiday Extension”). For the purposes of this paragraph, a “school holiday” includes a teacher work day or other day in which students are not required to attend school and which is announced by the applicable school system before the end of the Non-Custodial Parent’s normal weekend visitation. 