AR applications for physicians and healthcare professionals cover by far the largest user group [6]. 
However, especially for AR-supported image guidance and navigation, very high accuracy and reliability 
may be needed [9]. Applications, for which sub-millimeter precision is not necessary, are, for example, 
ablations, ventriculostomy [10-14] or certain orthopedic interventions [15]. Here, the HoloLens is with its 
inside-out tracking already a promising tool, but for applications that need, for example, sub-millimeter 
precision, it cannot be used reliably yet. An example is the deep brain stimulation (DBS) procedure used 
for treating essential tremor and Parkinson’s disease, where millimeter-to-submillimeter accuracy in DBS 
targeting (an electrode placement inside the brain) can be important [16]. Another study exploring the 
clinical accuracy of the HoloLens for neuronavigation concludes also that it is currently not within clinically 
acceptable levels [17]. The same holds true for some application scenarios in orthopedic surgery [18], like 
screw placement, where there is still room for improvement [19]. We expect the Vision Pro to move the 
needle in terms of accuracy, because of its strong inside-out tracking through 12 built-in cameras and 
LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) sensing method, which is the key aspect for increasing the accuracy
of AR. We do not see the often-criticized end-user price of $3,499 (without tax) for the Vision Pro as an 
issue for this user group. The price is similar to the HoloLens and much cheaper at a fraction of the costs 
compared to existing, and clinically used conventional medical navigation systems, e.g., from Brainlab or 
Medtronic. In this context, it is important to mention that the use of AR head-mounted displays (HMDs)
with direct patient reference (and outside of research in the context of feasibility studies) requires an 
appropriate regulatory approval and a certification/classification as medical device. The Magic Leap 2, for 
example, received certification for usage in an operating room in January of this year (2023). Moreover, 
and especially in a medical context, the display may also require an image focus in surgical table distance
[20].
Students are the second most common intended user group [6] with applications, for example, in 
educational training, like the HoloPointer, a virtual AR pointer for laparoscopic surgery training [21]. 
Another example is the usage of MR to teach medical students catheter placement [22] or a phantom 
experiment to study the effectiveness of learning using AR in the access of the central venous [23]. We 
found that the effects of HoloLens-based learning compared to conventional learning, e.g., by using 
cadavers or other computerized methods, seem to be rather small. A reason for this is that the learning 
tools usually used are relatively simple, conventional 3D models and more innovative visualizations, 
including interactive, dynamic content, which cannot be easily delivered by regular computerized 
methods, have not been explored in depth yet [6]. Here, we believe that the Vision Pro can raise the bar, 
because of its high-resolution visualization (consisting of two micro-OLED displays with a total of 23 
megapixels) that uses eye-tracking to make the headset also usable as a desktop screen with its fine 
textual details. In addition, the 3D user interface, using precise and intuitive finger tracking, can be a game 
changer. Despite these advances, it remains to be seen if an AR headset has a major advantage over a 
conventional screen. The cost of the Vision Pro is also a concern, especially for students with a limited 
financial budget, but the “Pro” might indicate that there will also be a “regular” version released.
Patients are currently the least frequented target user group with AR devices[6]. An example is MemHolo, 
which provides MR experiences for subjects with Alzheimer’s disease [24]. Other examples in this area
include the usage of the HoloLens as an assistant and monitoring tool for medication adherence [25] and 
the usage of a HoloLens-based system for functional mobility assessment [26]. However, many interesting 
assistance and monitoring applications are limited by the restricted possible usage time of untethered AR 
headsets primarily due to battery life, and this problem seems to remain with the Vision Pro, which has a 
similar battery life of approximately two hours, like the HoloLens. The only consolation is the “external” 
battery pack that can be swapped for the Vision Pro. Finally, the Apple M2 and the new R1 chip of the 
Vision Pro could potentially boost the relatively small number of applications that have been explored so 
far, e.g., by reducing motion sickness, especially for elderly patients, which are more susceptible to MR
sickness than younger users.