In the absence of correct diagnosis, emergency units are not in a position to treat the patient appropriately, e.g. headache treated as migraine in a neurological emergency unit, whereas a brain tumour is the underlying cause of the pain. Without a diagnosis, when the patient is a child, the family feels particularly guilty because the child is “acting weird” and is not performing normally in terms of mental and psychomotor development. Any abnormal eating behaviour, which accompanies many rare diseases, is frequently blamed on the mother, causing guilt and insecurity. Incomprehension, depression, isolation and anxiety are an intrinsic part of the
everyday life of most parents of a child affected by a rare disease, especially in the pre-diagnosis phase. The whole family of a rare disease patient, whether children or adults, is affected by the disease of the loved one and becomes marginalized: psychologically, socially, culturally and economically vulnerable. In many cases, the birth of a child with a rare disease is a cause for parental splitting.
Another crucial moment for rare disease patients is the disclosure of diagnosis: despite the progress made over the last ten years, the diagnosis of a rare disease is all too often poorly communicated. Many patients and their families describe the insensitive and uninformative manner in which diagnosis is given. This problem is common among health care practitioners, who are too often neither organised nor
trained in good practice for communicating diagnosis.
Up to 50% of patients have suffered from poor or unacceptable conditions of disclosure. In order to avoid face-to-face disclosure, doctors often give the terrible diagnosis by phone, in writing - with or even without explanation – or standing in the corridor of a hospital. Training professionals on appropriate ways of disclosure would avoid this additional and unnecessary pain to already anguished patients and
4 More information about the EurordisCare 2 survey can be found on the following websites: http://www.eurordis.org
and http://www.rare-luxembourg2005.org/
“Rare Diseases : Understanding this Public Health Priority” 9/14 Eurordis, November 2005 – www.eurordis.org
families. Further schooling in “breaking in bad news” to patients constitutes an important aspect of medical training.
A father tells: “When I went to pick up my one year-old daughter in the hospital after I had to leave her for many hours of examinations and testing, I anxiously asked the
paediatrician what my baby was suffering from. The doctor hardly looked at me and, rushing down the corridor, shouted: “This baby, you better throw her away, and get another child”.
Whatever the conditions of disclosure are, the diagnosis of a rare disease means that life is toppling. In order to help rare disease patients and their families face the future and avoid their world collapsing, psychological support is greatly needed. Every mother and father knows how many worries and hopes are involved in having a child. But what it means to be diagnosed - or having a child diagnosed - with a rare
disease cannot be explained.