Crop pest, weed, and disease management practice (§205.206)
Producers must implement management practices to prevent crop pests, weeds, and diseases that include but
are not limited to the following:
Accepted pest controls:
 Crop rotation and soil and crop nutrient management practices as outlined above.
 Sanitation measures to remove disease vectors, weeds seeds and pest organisms.
 Cultural practices to enhance crop health such as plant species and variety selection with regard to
suitability for site-specific conditions and resistance to pests, weeds, and disease.
 Mechanical and physical methods for controlling pest problems, such as:
o Biological controls (natural predators and parasites, habitat to promote biodiversity)
o Nonsynthetic controls such as lures, traps, fencing and repellants
Accepted weed controls:
 Mulching with fully biodegradable materials
 Mowing
 Livestock grazing
 Hand weeding or mechanical cultivation
 Flame, heat, or electrical means
 Plastic or synthetic mulches if removed from the field at the end of the growing/harvest season
Accepted disease controls:
 Management practices which suppress the spread of disease organisms. Examples include plant
spacing, choosing resistant varieties, and crop rotations. In greenhouses, this can also include the
proper control of environmental factors such as ventilation, humidity and temperature.
 Application of nonsynthetic biological, botanical, or mineral inputs
When the above pest, weed and disease preventative management practices are not sufficient, the following
practices are accepted:
 Application of a biological or botanical substance
 Application of a substance included on the National List of synthetic substances allowed for use in
organic crop production
Prohibited controls:
 Synthetic mulches or remnants left to photo-degrade in the field
 Synthetic herbicides, pesticides or fungicides with the exception of those included on the National List of
synthetic substances allowed for use in organic crop production
 Newspaper with color inks
 Biodegradable plastic mulch films not compliant with the NOP guidance
 Nonsynthetic substances included on the National List of nonsynthetic substances prohibited for use in
organic crop production

Post-Harvest Handling (§205.270 – 205.272)
Sanitation
Proper sanitation is required at all levels of handling, transport and storage. The use of disinfectants (chlorine
materials, hydrogen peroxide) applied to storage containers and handling equipment must be consistent with
the National List.
Irrigation and Wash Water
Ground and surface waters are a potential source for a wide range of contaminants. Verify your certifier’s
recommendations for water testing of irrigation and wash water.
Water used in direct post-harvest crop or food contact is permitted to contain chlorine materials at levels
approved by the Food and Drug Administration or the Environmental Protection Agency for such purpose.
However, rinsing with potable water that does not exceed the maximum residual disinfectant limit for the
chlorine material under the Safe Drinking Water Act (4ppm) must immediately follow this permitted use.
Certified operators should monitor the chlorine level of the final rinse water, the point at which the water last
contacts the organic product. The level of chlorine in the final rinse water must meet limits as set forth by the
Safe Drinking Water Act (4ppm).
Commingling and contact with prohibited substances
It is required that producers implement measures to prevent the commingling of organic and nonorganic
products. It is also required that organic producers protect organic products from contact with prohibited
substances.
Split Operations
Operations that choose to produce organic and non-organic livestock products or to hire services from custom
operators that may service non-organic and organic clients, must implement measures necessary to prevent
the commingling of organic and non-organic crop products.
Accepted practices
 Mechanical or biological methods including but not limited to cooking, baking, heating, drying,
preserving, dehydrating, freezing, and chilling crop products.
 Non-synthetic materials, such as rock powders, diatomaceous earth, and herbal preparations to repel
storage pests, must be consistent with the National List of nonsynthetic substances prohibited for use in
organic crop production.
 The use of synthetic materials, such as floating agents, must be consistent with the National List of
synthetic substances allowed for use in organic crop production.