Challenges and Considerations Promulgating the Final Rule
The CFPB took more than a decade before promulgating the final Section 1071 rule. Evaluating the extent of lending gaps—and specifically fair lending risks—in small business credit markets has complications. Dodd-Frank directed the definition of small business, discussed in the section of this report entitled “Summary of the Section 1071 Final Rule.” Nevertheless, the CFPB’s challenge was to design a dataset with the ability to conduct meaningful comparisons across loan products and over time given the various differences in small business types and models.
7 See CFPB, “CFPB Explores Ways to Assess the Availability of Credit for Small Business,” press release, May 10, 2017, https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom/cfpb-explores-ways-assess-availability-credit-small- business/.
8 For more information, see Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures, August 2009, https://www.ffiec.gov/pdf/fairlend.pdf.
9 See CFPB, “Small Business Lending under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (Regulation B),” March 30, 2023, https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/final-rules/small-business-lending-under-the-equal-credit-opportunity- act-regulation-b/.
  Congressional Research Service 2
Section 1071: Small Business Lending Data Collection and Reporting
    Multiple Small Business Definitions
No consensus definition of small business exists among the federal government and industry participants. Consequently, establishing a universal dataset to evaluate the performance of small business lending markets is challenging. Definitions of small business include the following:
• The SBA defines small business primarily by using a size standards table it compiles and updates periodically. The table lists size thresholds for various industries by either average annual receipts or number of employees.10 The SBA also defines small business differently for different SBA programs. For example, the SBA’s 7(a), Certified Development Company/504, and Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) programs have alternative size standards based on tangible net worth and average net income.11
• Academic research frequently uses a firm that has 500 employees or fewer (but does not monopolize an industry) as a proxy measure for a small business. Various federal agencies—such as the U.S. Census Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Federal Reserve—have relied upon this definition.12 In addition, some researchers view microbusinesses as a subset of small businesses. A common academic definition of microbusiness is a firm with only one owner, five employees or fewer, and annual sales and assets under $250,000.13
• Definitions of small business also vary in statute. For example, eligibility thresholds for “small business” tax incentives vary under tax law. Certain firms with average annual gross receipts of $25 million or less are able to use cash-based accounting for tax purposes. The tax credit for employee health insurance costs is available to employers with 25 or fewer employees whose average annual compensation is below a certain wage threshold.14
• According to a Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation survey, small and large banks have their own definitions of small business.15 Small banks (defined as banks with $10 billion or less in assets) often view a small business as one in which the owner “wears many hats,” referring to an owner who performs multiple tasks, perhaps because the firm is starting up or still in its early growth stage. Large banks define small business more formally in terms of annual revenues and sales.
• Likewise, the definition of small farm varies. For example, the Farm Credit System and parts of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) each define small farm or ranch as one with gross annual sales of less than $250,000. The USDA Economic Research Service, for statistical purposes, defines small farm as one having less than $350,000 of gross cash farm income. SBA defines small farms as those having less than $5 million in annual sales. The CRA definition of small farm loan is $500,000 or less.
     The Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-121) also requires the CFPB to address issues that could potentially have significant economic impacts on small entities subject to the Section 1071 rule.16 The CFPB had to consider, for example, key
10 For the current size standards, see SBA, “Table of Size Standards,” https://www.sba.gov/document/support-table- size-standards. For a historical analysis of the size standards, see CRS Report R40860, Small Business Size Standards: A Historical Analysis of Contemporary Issues, by Robert Jay Dilger, R. Corinne Blackford, and Anthony A. Cilluffo.
11 See SBA, “Lender and Development Company Loan Programs,” SOP 50 10 6, October 1, 2020, pp. 118-119.
12 See Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, The State of Small Business Lending: Innovation and Technology and the Implications for Regulation, Harvard Business School Entrepreneurial Management Working Paper no. 17-042, November 29, 2016.
13 See Tammie Hoy, Jessie Romero, and Kimberly Zeuli, Microenterprise and the Small-Dollar Loan Market, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, May 2012, https://www.richmondfed.org/-/media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/ economic_brief/2012/pdf/eb_12-05.pdf.
14 See CRS Report RL32254, Small Business Tax Benefits: Current Law, by Gary Guenther.
15 See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 2018 FDIC Small Business Lending Survey, revised December
20, 2018, https://www.fdic.gov/bank/historical/sbls/full-survey.pdf.
16 See CFPB, Final Report of the Small Business Review Panel on the CFPB’s Proposals Under Consideration for the Small Business Lending Data Collection Rulemaking, December 14, 2020, https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/ documents/cfpb_1071-sbrefa-report.pdf.
  Congressional Research Service 3

Section 1071: Small Business Lending Data Collection and Reporting
 differences in the lending models of large and small lenders, which affect the type and cost of data that would be collected.17
First, large and small lenders often collect different types of data. Large lenders typically engage in lending to borrowers who possess more conventional financial metrics and documentation (e.g., sales fluctuations, costs of inputs, specific industry factors), which is considered hard information that can be used in automated and statistical underwriting methodologies to price loans.18 By contrast, small lenders typically engage in relationship lending, meaning that they must develop close familiarity with their customers to gather soft information, which contains circumstantial details about factors such as non-standardized business risks, insufficient collateral, or weak or thin (business) credit histories. Because of soft information, the loan underwriting process to determine more customized loan products and loan pricing is generally less algorithmic and more labor intensive.19
Second, the type of information collected, which varies among lenders, would also be expected to influence their reporting costs. For example, because hard information is already quite uniform, large lenders may already have adopted automated technological systems that can handle large volumes of standardized and digitized financial data. In these cases, reporting is likely to be less expensive per applicant. By contrast, soft information is more unique to applicant circumstances, infrequent, and localized such that standardization of the data for electronic collection and reporting purposes is challenging. The reporting cost per applicant is also likely to be more expensive for small lenders that lack the volume of applications to justify the costs to convert soft information to digital and secure formats. Therefore, data likely to be informative about lending gaps in the small business and farm credit markets may be more difficult to standardize and more costly to collect, especially if small lenders predominantly serve these markets.
The CFPB also had to consider how Section 1071 implementation requirements might affect the supply of small business loans. For example, some institutions might decide to offer more standardized, less tailored financial products to reduce their reporting costs. Some lenders might require minimum principal loan amounts (e.g., $100,000) to ensure that the loans generate enough revenue to cover the costs to fund and report data, thereby leaving gaps in credit markets for many businesses that are starting up or small. In short, Section 1071 implementation, which is designed to identify any lending gaps, could potentially exacerbate lending gaps in various credit market segments without careful consideration of the potential impact of its requirements.