Why Is Year-End Close Important?
 This form of annual reporting stands as a resource for organizations when establishing budget, long-term, and short-term goals. With this financial data, organizational leaders can make informed decisions to greatly benefit their company – but it all starts with accurate reporting.
 

 There are multiple aspects of year-end close that must be considered when finalizing your company’s financial assets at the end of the fiscal year.
 

 The year-end close process includes:
 

 Adhering to legal/government regulations
 

 Modifying journal entries
 

 Preparing financial statements
 

 Balancing accounts
 

 When accountants have these benchmarks in mind, they can enjoy several benefits associated with a successful year-end close.
 

 Benefits of a Successful Year-End Close
 The year-end close process can help organizations improve and optimize their operations in several ways – not only can it identify areas for improvement throughout the financial process, but it also helps decision-makers determine areas to allocate resources. This ultimately enhances the overall financial performance of the entire business.
 

 Accuracy & Compliance
 The year-end close process ultimately confirms the accuracy of an organization’s financial reporting for the entire fiscal year – giving leaders and decision makers a crystal-clear view of the business’s financial performance and health. Financial data is verified, and accounts are reconciled during this process, ensuring that the company is complying with accounting standards and regulations.
 

 Decision-Making & Planning
 As we’ve discussed, the year-end close process is essential for future financial planning and budgeting. This level of reporting allows leadership to make informed decisions based on reliable data – highlighting potential problems, trends, and areas primed for growth - a huge help when planning for the next year.
 

 Now that you know why year-end close is critical for your company, do you know how to do it properly? Let’s talk about it.
 

 Best Practices for Year-End Close
 Businesses must keep accurate financial reporting data for proper planning and decision making, but the year-end close process is known to be both time-consuming and complicated.
 

 Lucky for you, BlackLine is on your side - and we’ve listed out the most important steps to take during your year-end close process:
 

 Prepare In Advance
 They say preparation is the key to success, and when we’re talking about closing your financial records at the end of the fiscal year, they couldn’t be more correct. If you operate throughout the year with your year-end close process in mind, you can save a lot of time and stress come the end of Q4.
 

 As you manage your financial data throughout the year, keep these tasks in mind:
 

 Understanding applicable tax deadlines and implications
 

 Analyzing your organization’s tax duties
 

 Auditing and verifying financial data (which you should have been doing every step of the way)
 

 Taking advantage of the applicable tax credits and tax deductions
 

 Analyze Your Company’s Finances
 Now that you’ve been keeping accurate records and a close eye on your company’s financial data for the entirety of the fiscal year, it’s time to conduct an in-depth financial review.
 

 This review should consist of the following tasks:
 

 Analyzing revenue and expenses
 

 Evaluating asset and liability statements (receivables, payables, loans, and inventory)
 

 Discovering and correcting anomalies
 

 

 Through this detailed financial analysis, you will be empowered to identify opportunities for growth and savings in the next year, as well as fix inconsistencies that arise in your organization’s liability and asset accounts before you prepare your financial statements.