Loss prevention is how you prevent inventory loss and preserve profits. It’s a critical concern for retailers, amounting to over $94.5 billion in U.S. retail losses in 2021. 
 It’s no wonder some 45% of retailers increased their loss prevention budgets in 2022. They know that theft, fraud, and unexplained inventory shrinkage can quickly eat up profits.
 Loss prevention is any practice designed to reduce a business's losses from theft, fraud, and operational errors. The goal of loss prevention is to eliminate preventable loss and preserve profits. It’s primarily found in retail, but also exists in other business environments. 
 Managing loss prevention can feel overwhelming, especially if you’re a small to mid-sized operation. By implementing a few key security measures, however, you can reduce your risk of loss and improve profitability. 
 Retail loss prevention consists of identifying shrinkage causes and following up with solutions. Businesses often implement strategies like hiring a loss prevention manager or installing security cameras to improve loss prevention and increase profits. 
 It occurs in various scenarios, such as misappropriation of funds, time theft, falsified expense reports, etc. Internal theft can be caused by both customers and employees and can cost organizations thousands of dollars annually.
 You can also keep your store safe by monitoring activity with CCTV (closed-circuit television). These cameras can watch entry points into the store, like the customer entrance and loading docks. They record what's going on so you can see if anyone's trying to get in who shouldn't.
 Using CCTV also acts as a deterrent for potential thieves. It gives the appearance of strong security and shows you take losses seriously. 
 Over 93% of retailers have a security policy or “code of conduct” for preventing loss and keeping people safe.
 For customers, your policy may include:
 Guidelines for respecting other customers and employees.
 Directions for reporting potential theft to store staff. 
 Rules against stealing or damaging items. 
 Train your employees on the rules and expectations of your security policy. Meetings and trainings are good ways to remind employees about the policy. To remind customers about the rules, you can also post signs around the store.
 inventory control is a system that retailers use to manage and track their inventory levels. This includes tracking product flow in and out of the store and keeping accurate sales records. You can reduce inventory losses and boost profits by implementing an inventory control system.
 It's important for retailers to invest in effective employee training to prevent shoplifting and other types of fraud. Educating staff on recognizing and preventing crimes can further protect your business and customers. 
 There are many types of awareness and education programs. The NRF’s National Security Survey asked which programs retailers used to train and educate team members about loss prevention and retail asset protection. 
 Here are the top initiatives they found: 
 Anonymous telephone “hotline” program (87.9%)
 Active shooter training programs (84.5%)
 Bulletin board notices/posters (82.8%) 
 Internet/computer-based training videos (79.3%)
 Face-to-face training during new hire orientation (74.1%)
 Anonymous online/email notification program (60.3%)
 It's easy to get loss prevention training. You can take an online course from Loss Prevention Academy or Loss Prevention Foundation or hire a third-party security and loss prevention expert to train your employees.
 Put up anti-theft signs. Signage around your store can help keep losses at a minimum. These are small reminders for potential shoplifters that tell them not to steal from your store. It can help deter people who don’t want to pay for items, especially if they know they are on camera. 
 Use a third-party accountant. Work with an external accountant to ensure your accounts are accurate and up-to-date. They can give you an unbiased look at your records, identify any discrepancies in your profits and losses, and help you track inventory more effectively. 
 Use your POS to identify loss. Sales and inventory reports help identify trends in missing items. It can also highlight patterns in gift card sales, returns and exchanges, and provide insight into who was working during times when suspicious activity took place.
 Hire a loss prevention specialist. These professionals are trained to identify potential areas of vulnerability and implement measures to help combat theft or fraud.
 Although Sears Canada finished shutting all its doors in early 2018, we can still learn from its example on the loss prevention front.
 Sears Canada focused on combining old standbys and cutting-edge technology. It armed loss prevention personnel with the best tools, not just the newest. It relied on video surveillance in all Sears Canada stores—but not to catch shoplifters after the fact.
 The loss prevention team used data and video analysis of in-store surveillance cameras to identify patterns, like areas of the store where customers spent a lot of time. By analyzing these patterns and sharing them across all stores, the team was better able to train their focus on “hot spots,” or areas prone to theft activity, and to catch shoplifting behaviors before they became a problem.
 One of the bigger retail developments of the past decade has been the appearance of self-checkout lines at major chains. Eliminating the cashier (scanning each item, interacting with customers, observing behavior) presents an obvious barrier to loss prevention efforts.
 Target approached this problem by leaning hard into one of the anti-shoplifting tactics above: conspicuous surveillance. If you’ve gone through self-checkout at a Target store recently, you might have noticed—right at eye level—your own face staring back at you. “You’re being monitored,” it reminds you. Target also trains surveillance on the scanner, so loss prevention personnel can see which items the customer scanned and which they didn't.