Key issues for the Providers:
1. Most people with hypertension in India are unaware of their condition. To improve
rates of detection of hypertension, all adults over the age of 18 should undergo
opportunistic screening for hypertension during visits to non-physician health staff as
well as health facilities. In addition, community based health workers should also do
targeted screening of high risk groups under their care – elderly > 60 years, diabetic,
obese, those with any cardiovascular disease, family history of premature
cardiovascular disease.
2. Screening for hypertension should involve measurement of blood pressure using a
validated device ( mercury or digital) with an appropriate sized cuff, following a
standardised procedure on a relaxed patient, seated with arm supported at the heart
level with the legs uncrossed. Diagnosis of hypertension should be based on a
minimum of 2 sets of readings on 2 different occasions, which are at least 1-4 weeks
apart, except in the case of hypertensive emergencies and urgencies. Hypertension
in persons <80 years of age is diagnosed on documentation of persistent elevation
of systolic BP of > 140 mm and/or 90 mm diastolic.
3. Patients should be educated about the nature of the disease and its therapy,
about lifestyle modifications that can reduce BP and cardiovascular risk. Patients
should undergo assessment for cardiovascular risk factors, target organ damage
related to hypertension, associated clinical conditions like diabetes, chronic kidney
disease, and cardiovascular disease ( e.g. coronary artery disease, stroke). Most of
these assessments which involve history, clinical examination, and examination for
proteinuria, diabetes, serum creatinine, lipids and ECG will be possible to complete
at the PHC and CHC levels with the advent of the free diagnostics initiative.
4. Hypertension is a primary care issue and best managed at the primary care level
with a team approach involving physicians, and allied staff. .Hypertension should be
managed using a combination of lifestyle modifications and use of drug therapy with
ACE inhibitors, Calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics, either alone or in
combination. The benefit of treatment is related to reduction of BP rather than the
use of a particular drug. All drug classes have equivalent effects but some are
preferred in the presence of compelling indiccation. Both Calcium channel blockers
and ACE inhibitors are effective, have few side effects, and have no adverse
metabolic consequences or high requirements for monitoring.
5. The target BP should be less than < 140 mm systolic in persons < 80 year old and
< 150 mm systolic in those over 80 years old, while the target diastolic BP is < 90
mm Hg. To achieve the target BP especially in those with Grade 2 and Grade 3
Hypertension may require the use of 2 or even drugs. Grade 1 HT which is
uncomplicated, may be given a trial of lifestyle modifications alone for 3 months,
6. Efforts should be made to promote follow up and adherence to long term therapy
to antihypertensive. In selected patients especially those with associated
cardiovascular disease, both statin and aspirin may be given along with
antihypertensive to reduce risk of CV event. In patients with diabetes, statins may be
indicated. Key issues for the programme: 8Screening, Diagnosis, Assessment, and Management of Primary Hypertension- Full
Document 

The screening of hypertension should be done by a physician or trained non
physician staff, using an automated BP instrument or any other validated
device, and following a standardised BP measurement procedure.
1.4.Blood pressure should be measured a few (5) minutes after the patient is in a
relaxed state, is seated with the arm at the level of the heart, with legs
uncrossed. The cuff should have a bladder whose length is about 80% and
whose breadth is about 40% of the arm circumference. If the auscultation
based method is being used, the then the cuff should initially be inflated to at
least 30 mm Hg beyond the point of disappearance of the radial pulse. It
should then be deflated at a rate of 2- 3 mm per second. The first and the
last audible Korotkoff sounds should be taken at the systolic BP and diastolic
BP respectively. The column should be read to the nearest 2 mm Hg.
1.5.At least 2 readings should be taken at each visit with an interval of at least 1
minute between the measurements. If the two readings are substantially
different a third reading should be taken. The lower of the two readings
should be taken as the representative SBP and DBP.

Hypertensive emergencies are potentially life-threatening situations
where hypertension (usually severe and > 180 mm systolic and >120
mm diastolic associated with the presence of recent onset and
progressive target organ damage resulting in cardiovascular,
neurologic, renal and visual dysfunction. These situations may include
severe hypertension associated with acute coronary syndrome (chest
pain), acute left ventricular dysfunction (shortness of breath), and
hypertensive encephalopathy (altered sensorium), stroke (focal
weakness), and renal failure. It is most often associated with severe
hypertension, except in children and pregnant women where
hypertensive emergencies can occur with lower elevations of BP. 
The induction and orientation session was held on 21st July 2015 in which the
facilitator (Chair) welcomed all the members of the subgroup, and set up the rules of
operation based on the STG development manual, on the consistent use of
terminology and definitions, using the structured power-point presentation provided
by NHSRC/NICE. None of the members report any conflict of interest in the
development of this guideline and have all signed their declarations
2. Search and selection of evidence based guidelines:
In view of the paucity of time available to develop this guideline, a decision was
taken by the Task Force for the Development of STGs for the National Health
Mission that these STGs would be adopted and/or adapted from existing
evidence based guidelines to make them relevant to our context, resource
settings and priorities.
A search was conducted for evidence based guidelines on primary hypertension,
which had been published within the past 5 years and which had been framed
using evidence based methodology and using international guideline
development criteria. The National Guidelines Clearinghouse (NGC) website was
used since the guidelines have already gone through a rigorous ‘quality’ sifts
based on international standards (http://www.guideline.gov/). The criteria for
Inclusion of Clinical Practice Guidelines in NGC are based on the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) Clinical Guidelines Standards 2011 and IOM systematic review
standards 2014. The guidelines available on the database have been developed,
reviewed, or revised within the past five years. The NGC entry criteria are similar
to the AGREE II Instrument criteria5

