Insulin is a small protein composed of 51 amino acids. Because insulin is derived from a living organism, it is considered a biologic, or biological product (the text box below defines biologics and describes their regulatory framework). Since the discovery of insulin, incremental modifications over time have resulted in improvements in safety, effectiveness, and convenience to patients.5

Insulin was discovered in 1921 by two University of Toronto researchers who sold their U.S. patents to the university for $1 each, so the drug could be produced at a reasonable cost.6 Facing challenges manufacturing sufficient quantities of insulin for the North American market, in 1923, the University of Toronto team partnered with—and licensed manufacturing rights to—several pharmaceutical companies.7 

Commercially available insulins today differ from the insulin discovered by the Toronto team. The original insulin was a short-acting product with a duration of action of 6-8 hours, making it less suitable for providing 24-hour coverage. In the late 1930s through the 1950s, researchers altered regular insulin by adding substances (e.g., protamine and zinc) to gain longer action, resulting in what are now called intermediate-acting insulins. One such advance, Neutral Protamine Hagedorn (NPH), was patented in 1946. It allowed for the combination of two types of insulin (long-acting and short-acting insulin) in premixed vials, making a single daily injection possible for some patients.8  

At that time, insulin was obtained by extraction from animals. As animal-derived products, insulins were subject to problems inherent to animal-tissue extracts, such as impurities, which could cause immunologic reactions impacting their safety and effectiveness.9  

Insulin production has changed over the years, as researchers altered insulin to improve the patient experience. In the late 1970s, advancements in biotechnology allowed for the replacement of animal insulin extracted from cattle and pig pancreases with human insulin produced using recombinant DNA technology. In 1982, Eli Lilly brought the first recombinant human insulins to the U.S. market: Humulin R (regular) and N (NPH). In the late 1980s, advancements in recombinant technology allowed scientists to modify insulin’s structure to improve its physiological effects. This advancement resulted in the development of insulin analogs, which more closely replicate normal insulin patterns in the body. In 1996, Humalog (insulin lispro) became the first rapid-acting insulin analog to be approved, followed by Novolog (insulin aspart) in 2000, and others thereafter.10 This same technology allowed for the development of long-acting insulin analogs. In 2000, Lantus (insulin glargine) became the first long-acting insulin analog, and others followed.11  

Some studies have questioned whether the more expensive analogs provide an advantage over regular insulin in controlling glucose levels or preventing diabetes-related complications in patients with type 2 diabetes.12 In addition to modifications to insulin itself, associated delivery devices, such as insulin pens, have provided a more convenient route of administration for patients compared with syringes. Subsequent patenting of these modifications upon approval has shielded insulin products from competition for extended periods. As new insulin products entered the market, insulin manufacturers discontinued many older versions of these products. The regulatory framework created challenges for bringing generic insulins to the market.13 