E-Sports Broadcasting
8
Introduction
Sportscasters on a Digital Field
Sitting at a desk underbright lights, two announcerstalk at afast clip. After a weekend
full of commentating, theirvoices are scratchyandfading, yet theirexcitement never wanes. No
one watchingcan see the two men, though a camerasitsjust afew feet infront ofthem. Instead,
the live audience andhome viewers see the Europeanchampions, Fnatic,going head to head
with SK Gaming on a virtualbattlefield. They're 55 minutes into an absoluteslugfest, the two
announcers'voices rise andfallwith the action ofthe game. Over the PA, the audience hears
that this game is mere seconds awayfrom ending. The SK team has Fnaticon the ropes after
brilliantlydefending their base. Fnatic'sstarplayer, Xpeke stays, attempting to win the game
singlehandedly.
The casters initiallydismiss the lastditch effort while the bulk of SK's team move to end
thegameontheothersideofthemap.However,thecamerastaysonXpeke whoisina
showdown with one memberofSK. NanosecondsawayfromdefeatXpeke dodgesa deadly
ability. The casters erupt in nearly unintelligible,frantic excitement as the 25,000 live attendees
atSpodek Arena in Katowice, Polandcheerat the sudden Fnaticvictory. Back in the realworld,
theentireFnaticteamjumpsawayfrom theircomputersandpileontoXpeke whilewe hear, "I
do not believe it! Xpeke's done it!" Over 643,000 online viewers around the world watch the
camerapan acrossthe SK team, stunnedin theirdefeat. From theirhome computers, these
viewers have just witnessed e-sports history.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 9
The above scene unfolded at the 2014 Intel Extreme Masters World Championships in
League of Legends, a popular e-sports title. The solo maneuver that Xpeke performed on that
stage has since made its way into common LeagueofLegends vernacular, being invoked in any
match, casual or professional, where a player deftly ends a game singlehandedly. E-sports, which
encompasses many more titles than League of Legends, has become a cultural phenomenon of
sorts. People may wonder whether the whole scene is just a flash in the pan or something more
significant.
I begin this thesis in much the same way that I have begun many conversations over the
past two years: defining e-sports. In most of those conversations, I simply say "professional
video-gaming" and move on to other topics. Here, though, I fully elaborate on what e-sports
means. More than just professional gaming, e-sports is an entire industry created around
competitive gaming at all levels of play. An e-sport is not a just a sports video game like the title
might suggest, though some e-sports titles are sports video games. Instead, e-sports titles are
meticulously balanced, competitive, multiplayer games. Many games would fall into this
category, but it takes a community of people to take an e-sport to the level of the classics like
Counter Strike and Starcraft.
Such communities are core to the identity of e-sports. Indeed, this identity itself is an
oxymoronic collision of geek and jock culture; a mixture that media would have us believe acts
like oil and water. Even within e-sports communities lines are hazy and misdrawn. As Taylor
and Witkowski (2010) show in their study of a mega-LAN event, the e-sports scene is fraught
with identity issues not only from outside, but within as well. The jock-like first-person-shooter
(FPS) players competing at the same event as the nerdy, enigmatic World of Warcraft players
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
10
shows the conflicting, lived masculinities in e-sports. Players are unsure whether to act like
superstar athletes or tech-geeks. Can you be both?
The word e-sports alone evokes such a conflicting image. Electronic sports seems almost
paradoxical in nature. Have we moved beyond a physical match of skill and extended our
contests to avatars in a digital world? How can two players sitting at a desk be sporting? As e-
sports continue to grow not only as a segment of the gaming industry, but as a spectator affair,
we begin to see the 'sports' side of e-sports both challenged and invoked more frequently. In a
telling case, Twitter erupted after a Dota 2 tournament made an appearance on ESPN 2 in
2014. With $10 million at stake, many e-sports fans thought the event warranted the attention of
the all-sports network. Plenty of viewers took to social media to praise the move made by ESPN.
Others were shocked: "Espn2 is seriously airing an online gaming championship? Wtf man. This
is our society now. That is not a sport" (Hernandez 2014). The sports status of e-sports has been
both defended and attacked by journalists, academics, and fans alike.
The debate about the status of e-sports has been raging for many years. Witkowski's
piece, "Probing the Sportiness of E-Sports", presents both sides of the argument pulling from
games studies scholars and assessing e-sports on their terms. Ultimately though, I believe she
shelves the debate deftly when she states, "sport is a personal experience... as many a sporting
scholar has written before - if an individual considers the sporting activity they are engaged in to
be a sport... then it is a sport" (2009, 56). I do not wish to rehash this debate. I have no stake in
it. As Witkowski asserts, the attempt would be futile. Instead, I accept the role traditional sports
have played in the shaping of e-sports.
In fact, exploring the relationship between e-sports and their traditional counterpart drives
this work. In what follows, I argue that the sports media industrial complex has fundamentally
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
11
shaped the current e-sports industry. Beyond this grounding, e-sports broadcasters constantly
borrow from traditional televisual broadcasts, using models that they feel to be appropriate for
their medium. Regardless of whether e-sports qualify as sports or not, they are constantly
informed by sports broadcasting and follow a trajectory set out by traditional sports models.
This work comes about at in an interesting moment in e-sports history. E-sports
audiences have never been larger, Riot games boasted an impressive 27 million viewers for the
League ofLegends World Championship in 2014 while the 2015 Intel Extreme Masters world
championship saw over 1 million concurrent viewers across multiple live-streaming platforms
(Riot Games 2014; ESL 2014). An old classic, CounterStrike, has re-emerged, albeit in a new
package. The audience it continues to draw proves that some titles have staying power in this
fickle industry. At the same time, a new title, League ofLegends, consistently pulls in over
100,000 concurrent viewers for its weekly shows in the U.S. and E.U. As the League ofLegends
Championship Series moves into its fifth season, it has come to resemble a traditional sports
broadcast more than it does its fellow e-sports shows. A new addition in Season 5, a segment
called Prime Time League (PTL) is nearly indistinguishable from ESPN's Pardon the
Interruption (PTI) at a glance.
Figure 1-Left Image: Prime Time League; Right Image: Pardon the Interruption
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 12
Comparing these two images reveals the level of sports emulation found in e-sports broadcasting
today. From the stats and schedule ticker at the bottom of the screen to the show rundown along
the edge of the screen, an uninitiated viewer would have difficulty distinguishing between the e-
sports show and the traditional sports show.
A steady influx of television producers and directors are starting to shape an industry that
already has an identity crisis while still investigating how best to harness the new medium of
live-streaming. These assertions are not meant to give the impression that we stand on the edge
of wholly untouched land as pioneers in a new frontier. As shown in the e-sports literature
review to follow, the e-sports industry has a history of evoking the feeling of standing on a
precipice.
Organization
In the introduction, I first provide a brief history of e-sports and take note of the
directions e-sports scholarship has pursued. Following this review, I introduce the sports media
industrial complex to better situate e-sports broadcasting within the larger media landscape of
sports broadcasting: the focus of chapter 1.
The first chapter begins by looking at the long history of sports and media. By
introducing the full gamut of sports media, I am better able to investigate how e-sports
broadcasting stays in conversation with each of its predecessors. As evidenced in the reshuffling
of sports media through history, we can see that e-sports make use of all of these forms of media
while creating something new. During this chapter, I look to the transition moments in traditional
sports broadcasting as the foundation ofthe e-sports industry. Moments of tension and doubt
within the sports media industry as it shifted from one medium to another provide perfect lessons
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 13
to be learned by the e-sports industry as they struggle with some of the same issues found in the
reshuffling of media history. Indeed, while making use of the same media through journalism,
public relations, and audiovisual broadcasts, the e-sports industry constantly wrangles with the
use of the newly emerged medium of live-streaming. Television especially influences live-
streamed broadcasts, which e-sports broadcasts tend to approach with the same framework as
television.
Chapter two focuses on e-sportscasters, also known as shoutcasters. I begin the chapter
with a brief look at the history of shoutcasting. Considering that many of the early shoutcasters
pull solely from traditional sportscasters, understanding their influences is crucial in
understanding how e-sports has evolved in the way it has. As, I argue, the single most pointed
signaling of the sportiness in e-sports, these individuals have pushed the e-sports industry
towards a sports model. When first time viewers or listeners leave an e-sports broadcast with the
distinct feeling of a sports broadcast in their mind, it is the shoutcasters doing their job. They rely
heavily on conventions set by traditional sportscasters. Much like their predecessors when faced
with something new, shoutcasters borrowed what they could and innovated when there was
nothing to borrow. Chapter two also focuses on shoutcasters' formulation of their identity within
the e-sports industry as personalities, professionals, and record-keepers. Shoutcasters are just
now creating an identity separate from traditional sportscasting. Where veteran shoutcasters
relied primarily on traditional sports broadcasts, newer casters look instead to other shoutcasters.
These shoutcasters are reshaping their identity while attempting to fully embrace the new
medium of live-streaming.
The third and final chapter tackles the topic of economics in e-sports. As the history and
trajectory of sports broadcasting has profoundly affected the e-sports industry, many of the
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
14
economic models present in traditional sports bled into the e-sports industry as well. The e-sports
industry in the US and Europe has yet to be analyzed as such. Some work (Taylor 2012) has
focused on e-sports revenue streams including sponsorships, company models, and team
ownership, but overall, the subject remains underexplored. Dal Yong Jin's (2010) analysis of the
political economy of e-sports in South Korea offers a tool set for this chapter. While the South
Korean e-sports model spawned out of an extremely particular set of circumstances that cannot
be readily applied to the U.S. or E.U. e-sports scenes, Jin's investigation of the surrounding
economic systems surrounding e-sports translates well to my own investigation of the U.S. and
E.U. industries. As staggering prize pools continue to make headlines, it is easy to lose sight of
the economic system working behind the scenes to keep e-sports financially salable, or in some
cases not. The third chapter delves into traditional sports economics and their influence on the e-
sports industry. In some areas, the models translate perfectly. In others, e-sports has been unable
to tap into the same revenue generators as traditional sports. Unless some developments
significantly alter the e-sports industry, it may be more tenable to pursue other models instead of
the sports industry.
Methods
This thesis makes use of many qualitative methods including historical analysis,
interviews, and fieldwork. To grasp the significance and situation of e-sports broadcasting in its
current state fully, one must analyze the same developments in traditional sports broadcasting.
As one takes a deeper look into the past of the professional sporting industry, its influences on e-
sports become clear. A feedback loop has been created between the two. Historical analysis
offers a glimpse at key moments which defined the incredibly successful global sports industry.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 15
Not only are similar situations appearing in e-sports, but e-sports pushes back into each of the
investigated forms of media. A few of the issues currently facing e-sports could be resolved
through following the path established by traditional sports, while other issues have been caused
because so much has been borrowed.
I also had the pleasure of conducting seven interviews with professional shoutcasters. I
limited the selection of shoutcasters to full-time professionals, rather than amateurs, to get an
insight into how these new professionals view their role within the industry. Roughly half the
participants are veteran shoutcasters of five or more years. The other half have joined the scene
more recently with one in particular having shoutcasted professionally for less than one year. As
these informants are a few of only dozens of professional shoutcasters in the world, I have
attempted to keep their identities anonymous. As professional personas, some of these casters
may benefit from being associated with this work, but I do not want to run the risk of potentially
linking these shoutcasters with their statements in the event that this information could somehow
affect the community's perception of the individual or potentially harm their prospects within the
e-sports industry. The conversations were all positive, but one can never truly assure their
informants that information they have provided in confidence will have no repercussion in any
foreseeable future. With these considerations in mind I decided before conducting the interviews
that the informants would remain anonymous.
Finally, I was also able to spend time working within the e-sports industry. My time spent
working for a prominent e-sports company profoundly shaped this thesis. Working alongside
industry professionals sparked countless conversations about the current climate of the e-sports
industry and possible futures. These conversations have both helped and challenged my thinking
about the e-sports industry. While I often refer to the e-sports industry or community as a
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 16
homogenous whole, the professionals who live within the space are not all of one mind and it
would be a mistake to present them that way. Within e-sports, there are many different games
and communities vying for viewers, players, and attention. What follows is my best attempt at
wrangling the many paths e-sports has started to follow.
E-sports Literature Review
E-sports is still a young industry and an even younger subject of critical inquiry. Most
entries into e-sports scholarship have emerged within the last five years. E-sports literature tends
to come from the much older tradition of games studies, but ties into many other fields including
the social sciences, cultural studies, economics, and law. Professional-gaming literature is a
veritable hotbed of potential research topics with more articles, theses, and dissertations
appearing every year. Much of the growing body of e-sports literature focuses on the
professionalization of gaming (Jin 2010; Mora and Heas 2005; Swalwell 2009; Taylor, Nicholas
2009; Taylor, T.L. 2012; Witkowski 2012). These histories offer much more than a rundown of
the events that created the e-sports industry. They also offer insight into our contemporary social
moment. The arrival of a professionalization of video gaming signals many significant
developments within both western and non-western culture. The global nature of e-sports and its
meshing together of complex and often conflicting identities continues to beg investigation.
E-sports literature primarily resides within the social sciences. Many cultural analyses in
e-sports (Chee and Smith 2005; Harper 2010 and 2014; Hinnant 2013; Swalwell 2009; Taylor
2011) have focused on the communities growing within different scenes. Todd Harper, for
instance, investigates the culture of competitive fighting games, a fascinating community which
stands both within and at odds with the rest of competitive gaming. Gender studies are also
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 17
becoming increasingly common within e-sports literature (Chen 2006; Crawford 2005; Leonard
2008; Taylor 2009 and 2011; Taylor and Witkowski 2010; Witkowski 2013). With the
fascinating and fraught formulation of masculinity within these spaces as well as the perceived
absence of femininity, gender studies are incredibly important within e-sports literature. Nicholas
Taylor (2011) offers insight into the ability of e-sports to create embodied performances of
masculinity at live events which spread through communities specific to certain titles or genres.
Taylor and Witkowski (2010) also show the conflicting versions of masculinity that appear in
different e-sports genres.
There has also been an increasing focus on e-sports as a spectator activity. Jeff Huang
and Gifford Cheung (2012) found in a study that many of the e-sports fans they investigated
prefer watching high-level play rather than playing a match themselves. Kaytou and Raissi
(2012) also investigate spectatorship in e-sports with a focus on how best to measure live-
streaming audiences. Others (Bowman 2013; Gommesen 2012; Kow and Young 2013) show that
the audience in e-sports has a profound effect on performance for the players, akin to a
traditional sports audience. These scholars also investigate the expertise apparent in e-sports
players that is passed on through spectating as often as practicing.
As the professional play of video games fascinates so many, e-sports literature has
understandably focused primarily on professional players. Notable exceptions include Jin (2012)
and Taylor (2012) who, while still heeding players, also investigate the surrounding factors
which allow for play at a professional level. Without these other factors, professional players
would not exist. It is from the tradition of these two authors, among others, that I base this work.
This thesis, like many of the works listed above seeks to better understand the phenomenon of e-
sports while analyzing a particular segment of the scene. With few investigations into the
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 18
broadcasting of e-sports, I hope to contribute to e-sports literature in a way that is both unique
and replicable to other systems found within the larger e-sports framework.
Sports Media Industrial Complex
As sport and media become increasingly intertwined, it becomes difficult to analyze one
without at least acknowledging the impact of the other. Pointing to the inextricable link between
sports and media, sports media scholar K. Lefever (2012) argues, "while sport provides valuable
content and audiences for media operators, the media is a revenue source and promotional tool
for sport." As such, the steady professionalization and, in turn, commercialization of sport relies
heavily on its media counterpart. The subsequent interdependence between media outlets,
sponsors, and sports leagues creates what is often referred to as the sports/media complex or
sports media industrial complex (Jhally 1989, Rowe 1999, Maguire 1991). Wenner (1989)
coined the neologism, MediaSport, to define the deeply rooted relationship between sports and
media. The two can hardly be considered separate anymore.
Stein (2013), a Comparative Media Studies alumni, building on the work of these earlier
scholars created a model which could be applied to new arrivals in the sports media landscape.
Thankfully, Stein provides a fairly replicable analysis of sports video games within the broader
sports media landscape. His investigation of the relationship between televisual sports video
games and sports media largely informs my own work. He notes an almost relentless stream of
advertising and commercialization rhetoric appearing in sports video games. Building on the
work of Wenner, Rowe, and Jhally, he argues that the commodification and capitalist trends
found in traditional sports broadcasting bleed into newer media such as video games. This steady
influx of advertising and commercialization can be found in e-sports as well.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 19
As e-sports broadcasters gain more experience and access to more robust technology,
they have started to incorporate many of the same commercial opportunities Stein noticed in
sports video games. Segments of the broadcast are occasionally sponsored, or one might see a
sponsor make an appearance in an event's title such as the Intel Extreme Masters tournament.
Where Stein argues that sports video games incorporate these advertisements as a signifier of
their televisual legitimacy, I argue that e-sports broadcasters make use of the same strategies
because they are informed by earlier forms of sports media.
The steady commercialization found in e-sports reveals the influence that the sports
media industrial complex has had on the e-sports industry. In documenting the dynamics of the
sports media industrial complex, Jhally (1989) argues that sports are best viewed as
commodities. Jhally's model focuses on the sporting industry in the US prior to the emergence of
new media. More readily applicable to e-sports, Lefever's (2012) analysis of the sports media
complex within new media details a phenomenon which has upended the former relationships
between stakeholders in the sports media industrial complex. She claims that, "the sports/media
complex has somehow changed, allowing the different stakeholders to take up new roles"
(Lefever 2012, 13). The stakeholders, including sports franchises, sponsors, and media outlets,
have had to adapt to a new media landscape with new roles. These new roles are more transient
within the high-demand world of new media. Sports organizations and franchises have taken a
more active role in connecting with fans, media outlets have taken a larger interest in sports
franchises (often buying sports franchises if it is less expensive than purchasing media rights),
and sponsors have taken advantage of new, innovative ways to reach consumers (Lefever 2012,
21). According to sports scholars Haynes and Boyle (2003), television sports viewers are no
longer expected to just sit back and relax. Instead they are expected to follow their sport through
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 20
social media, forums, blogs, and other digital outlets. This new, active fan fits well within the e-
sports industry and live-streaming, but has changed the traditional sports media industrial
complex. Before delving too far into the role of traditional sports economic models on e-sports,
however, I will first situate live-streaming and e-sports within the larger sports media industrial
complex.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
21
Chapter 1
Sports Media in Transition From Print to Live-Streaming
Every day, millions of Americans are catching up with the latest sports news through
print, radio, television, and online. Sports have saturated the entire spectrum of mass media in
the US. With the emergence of each form of mass media, sports coverage has been at the
forefront of adoption and innovation (Bryant and Holt 2006, 22). Each major medium shift in the
US has been accompanied by a massive reshuffling of the sports media landscape. Often, this
reshuffling opens a space for a particular sport to take up the new medium, create conventions,
and carve a path for others to follow. These sports were not spawned by mass media, but their
spike in popularity around the emergence of a new medium indicates very specific social
moments in the US. Early sports magazines and print coverage of sports focused primarily on
prize-fighting, radio ushered in the golden era of baseball, and television transformed football
into a titanic entertainment industry. The rise and stabilization of sports media are as much a
product of available technology as they are indicative of societal preoccupations of the time. If
sports and sports media are indicative of our social moment, then what can we glean from the
arrival of live-streaming and e-sports?
The co-evolution of sports and media is the coalescence of many factors including
changes in power structures, modes of production, and available technology. As Bryant and Holt
argue in their investigation of the history of sports and media, "[e]ach epoch of social evolution
has witnessed important sports-media developments that were affected by the evolving socio-
cultural environment" (2006, 22). In what follows, I trace the co-evolution of sports and media
with particular focus on the relationship between emerging mass media and the media ecology
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 22
surrounding that emergence. By documenting these moments of turbulence, I establish the
framework necessary to analyze live-streaming as a new medium with which e-sports has
emerged as an early adopter and convention creator. Live-streaming did not emerge
independently from its predecessors, but rather delivers on the preoccupations of our current
social moment. It has once again started a reshuffling of the roles of media within the sports
media complex. E-sports, while primarily viewed through live-streaming, relies on all of the
previous forms of media to varying degrees. With this framework in mind, I argue that the
feedback between live-streaming, e-sports, and traditional sports has spawned an industry which
roots itself in traditional sports media while still investigating the full potential of live-streaming.
I begin by briefly discussing sports media in antiquity with Thomas Scanlon's (2006)
piece on ancient Mediterranean sports and media. After this introduction to sports media, I move
to the US in the late eighteenth century with the emergence of the first sports-only publication,
the sports magazine, as well as early print news coverage of prize fighting during the rise of
industrialization and nationalism. The next section maps the push towards immediacy in sports
coverage and the rise of radio. On the heels of radio and the golden age of baseball, I discuss the
early issues with televised sport before the post-war era. Moving into the 1950s and 1960s, I
detail the transformation of football into a televisual sport accompanied by a very specific social
contingency. I then transition into an investigation of live-streaming and e-sports, particularly
how both are in conversation with sports media history.
Origins of Sports Media
As classicist Thomas Scanlon (2006) posits, there is no history of sports without its
media counterpart. Media in antiquity, he argues, "are a tool of society, a means of transmitting a
message, primarily one from the rulers to the ruled" (Scanlon 2006, 17). While his definition is
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 23
quite limited, Scanlon is correct in noting that media are inflected with the power structures of a
society. Sports as media were classically used by those with power to reinforce the hierarchy.
Sports events were "represented as a benevolent benefaction from the rich, noble, and
empowered to those marginalized" (Scanlon 2006, 18). This reinforcement of power structures
comes through not only in the production of sporting events, but also in the medium itself.
Scanlon suggests that the most powerful sports 'medium' in classical times was Roman
architecture. The massive circuses and arenas were meant to "provoke awe, admiration, and
obedience in the citizens" (Scanlon 2006, 18). Scanlon establishes that the predominant sports
medium in a given society correlates directly with their notions of power. Within the realm of
more dispersed authority such as the Ancient Greeks, sports media reflected the high value of an
individual and his merits. Depictions of athletics in Ancient Greek poetry and pottery, made by
and for the common people, focus on a particular athlete's prowess more than the event itself. On
the other hand, societies with incredibly rigid hierarchies and god-kings such as the Ancient
Egyptians and Persians, tend to represent sports as a demonstration of the ruler's power over
their people. Ancient Rome, with its centrally focused authority, used architecture to demonstrate
the power of the nobility as both benefactors and arbiters, diminishing the role of the athlete to
that of an entertainer. Moving into more recent history with media such as newspapers and radio,
Scanlon concludes that sports media became an amalgamation of both the Roman and Greek
styles: large spectacles with massive personalities.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 24
Establishing a Media Landscape: Early Sports Media in America
The importance of the printing press on modem society cannot be overstated. While its
precise effects are still being debated', the affordances of the printing press allowed individuals
to produce and disseminate a massive amount of information far more efficiently than ever
before. With a massive rise in literacy rates and increased access to print brought about by the
printing press, the reading population of the world shifted (Eisenstein 1983). While early
readership was restricted to a very small subset of society, the printing press paved the way for
the coverage of more mundane topics such as sports. In their analysis of sports media in pre-
industrial America, sports media scholars Jennings Bryant and Andrea Holt point to two major
developments: first, the appearance of sports in newspapers as 'general news' and second the
creation of a completely sports-centered publication: the sports magazine (2006, 22). The advent
and success of sports magazines in the early nineteenth century stands as a marker for some of
the intellectual shifts of the industrial era. During this time we see a professionalization of sport
in the form of prize fighters. We also see a shift from sports as a local leisure activity to
something that one follows from a distance. Sports contests began to take on implications
beyond a mere matching of athletes.
Many sports magazines started out as independent, one-person operations that began
circulation in the 1820s and 1830s (Bryant and Holt 2006, 22). The Spiritof the Times, one of the
earliest iterations of the sports magazine, actually reached a circulation of over 100,000 readers
by the 1840s. The success of this initial sports-focused publication displays the roots of the
American sports media tradition. While they note the significance of sports magazines in the
overall climate of sports media in America, Bryant and Holt trace the advent of modem sports
1See Elizabeth Eisenstein. 1983. The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe. New York: Cambridge University Press.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 25
media to recaps of prize fighting in the Penny Press age of the 1830s. With increased circulation
to the middle and lower classes, sports coverage increased substantially in the mid-nineteenth
century. Sports coverage in the Penny Press era focused on creating spectacular depictions of
sporting events. As McChesney, a media historian points out, James Gordon Bennett, owner of
the New York Herald,was "one of the first exponents of 'sensationalism' as a means of
generating circulation, and sport fit comfortably within this rubric" (1989, 51) Out of the
sensationalism present in these early newspapers, sports began to take on more significant
cultural meaning.
There was particular focus on regionalism and nationalism. Sports media scholar J.
Enriquez explains that sporting events were far more likely to be covered if they featured a
contest which reflected the social preoccupations of the day such as a northern horse racing
against a southern horse, or an American boxer fighting a European (2002, 201). Through these
mediated depictions, sporting events were encoded with much more meaning than a simple
contest. They reflected the contemporary hopes and anxieties of the people. Sports media built
up athletes as representatives. Newspaper recaps did much more than simply describe the
actions; they created dramas (McChesney 1989, 51). The hyped up imagery of athletes and their
contests created through the Penny Press and sports magazines became the paradigm for sports
coverage for decades while a new sport caught America's attention.
Newspaper Sports Writing and the Rise of Team Sports
The rise of baseball as a national pastime coincide with the period of time just after the
American Civil War. McChesney explains, "The Civil War introduced baseball to an entire
generation of Americans, as the troops on both sides played the game when time permitted.
Indeed, baseball emerged as the preeminent national team sport during this period" (1989, 52).
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 26
After the Civil War, baseball helped mediate conflict by providing common ground for
northerners and southerners. This moment was one in which the country was seeking to heal its
rift, looking for neutral things that could bind the nation together. Baseball filled a political
agenda by giving people something to focus on without opening old wounds. Sports writing
changed drastically in the years following baseball's spike in popularity. Sports coverage began
to receive regular columns and increased coverage throughout the late nineteenth century,
leading to a new kind of journalistic specialization: the sports-writer (Enriquez 2002, 202). This
fixation on sport was a result of new socio-cultural environments. Mandelbaum (2004), a sports
media scholar and historian, argues that the industrial revolution created a new sports landscape
through several major developments. First, the notion of childhood had expanded. In the
nineteenth century, the period between birth and entering the workforce increased substantially.
The new notion of childhood permitted more people to engage with baseball, football, and
basketball. This increased interest in team sports continued into adulthood. Watching and reading
about sports in the newspaper or sports magazines became an acceptable way to recapture the
"carefree years of their lives" (Mandelbaum 2004, 2). Mandelbaum also argues that baseball
offered a renewed connection to pastoral America, creating a feeling of nostalgia for the new city
dwellers and factory workers who desperately missed the pace and beauty of rural America.
Baseball coverage created the first major feedback loop between sports and media in
America. Bryant and Holt claim that the importance of sport was downplayed significantly in the
puritan era, but, "regular, routine reporting of sports in newspapers and specialized magazines
helped shift the cultural attitude towards sports in general" (Bryant and Holt 2006, 25). They
argue that in the late 1870s through the 1890s, Americans adopted a new stance on sports as
important for the development of mind, body, and society. This new cultural stance on sports
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 27
was shaped and fostered by an increased media coverage of sports. As baseball and its media
coverage became more professionalized, Americans began to consume sports media in
completely different methods. Sports spectatorship became a regular and acceptable pastime for
the industrial worker.
The industrial revolution created the first opportunity in America for sports production
and spectatorship to be commercially successful endeavors. The growth of cities and the massive
developments in individual mobility allowed for sporting events to take on new significance
(Mandelbaum 2004, 3). Cities provided large numbers of sports players as well as spectators to
fill newly built stadiums and watch newly formed teams. Sports fandom in the U.S. fit neatly
into the predominant forms of labor and leisure. Zillmann and Paulus (1993), two psychologists
who wrote on sports spectatorship, explain, "spectatorship, as a significant form of recreation, is
an outgrowth of the monotony of machine-dictated labor, sports events became the weekend love
affair of all those whose workday was strictly regulated by production schedules" (601).
Zillmann and Paulus' article further supports the feedback between sports media consumption
and societal structures. Live spectatorship in America had previously been seen as a luxury for
the rich and powerful, but with the increased circulation of newspapers, and in particular sports
coverage, to the middle and lower classes, sports spectatorship became accessible to an entirely
new sector of the population (Bryant and Holt 2006, 21). Architecture once again emerged as an
important medium. Large concrete and steel stadiums were created, replacing the more
organically created playing fields of the late nineteenth century (Mandelbaum 2004, 52). We see
here an important transition into the production of sport as a money making opportunity. As I
discuss in the third chapter, the introduction of investors and producers fundamentally alters
sports and their media counterparts.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 28
The available media shaped the portrayal and perception of athletics in the industrial era
as well. The idea may sound a bit romantic, but Benjamin Rader (1984), a sports scholar focused
on the transformation of sports media in America, labels the period of sports media prior to
television as an era of heroes. Whether speaking of prize-fighters or the Mighty Casey of
folklore, sports media in the industrial era painted athletes as larger-than-life characters. Rader
claims, "[t]hose standing on the assembly lines and those sitting at their desks in the
bureaucracies increasingly found their greatest satisfaction in the athletic hero, who presented an
image of all-conquering power" (1989, 16). To Rader, sports media before television presented
the American ideal. Athletes were meritocratic role-models playing for the love of the game.
Rader's analysis places the impetus on newspapers to depict dramatic stories with characters
akin to David and Goliath.
In addition to individual mobility, urbanization, and industrial work, Enriquez attributes
the rise and legitimacy of sports journalism as the catalyst for the nationalization of sports in
America (2002, 201). As all forms of communication and nationalization were transforming,
sports coverage lead the charge. In the early twentieth century, most newspapers had dedicated
sports writers on staff. These sports writers became famous through their innovative and
entrancing writing. Writers like W. 0. McGeehan, who worked for many San Francisco papers,
described athletes as sorrowful sages and their contests as the clashing of titans on a battlefield
(Nyhistory.org 2015). In this period however, it is difficult to judge the difference between
journalism and public relations (Bryant and Holt 2006, 30). In fact, the issue of PR penetrating
journalism in the late nineteenth to early twentieth century is explicitly laid out in Michael
Schudson's (1981) chapter, "Stories and Information: Two Journalisms in the 1890s". At the turn
of the century, there existed a dichotomy between news as entertainment and news as
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 29
information. As papers around the country struggled to define themselves, sports media also
went through a defining period. Legitimate sports writing became known for its higher literary
quality, but read more like advertisements with its exaggerated, often hyperbolic, language.
Public relations soon became as much a part of sports journalism as describing the events
themselves. Team owners understood the media's role in keeping attendance at sporting events
up and began catering to sports journalists for coverage (Enriquez 2002, 206). The team owners
expected sports journalists to act as publicists for their events. The gambit paid off as sports
writing filled more and more of the daily papers and attendance at live events continued to rise.
The sports writers added significance to the experience of watching a sporting event. Between
the shifts in the American middle class, leisure activities, and the flowery language of sports
journalism, watching a sporting event began to take on the significance of watching history
unfold. We will see these same issues appear again in e-sports coverage as journalism becomes a
legitimizing force within the e-sports landscape, torn between deep analysis and hyped-up
depictions for the sake of generating publicity.
Liveness continued to assert its role in sports media as new technologies emerged. The
telegraph especially placed the impetus on news sources to provide timely information. In a
fascinating illustration of the desire for timely sports news, the ChicagoTribuneran the
following note on March 17, 1897, the day of the legendary boxing match between Jim Corbett
and Rob Fitzsimmons: "The Tribune will display bulletins today on the prize fight. It has secured
a telegraph wire to the ring in Carson City and a competent man will describe the progress of the
fight, blow by blow, until the test is decided. The bulletins will be posted thirty seconds after
they are written in the far Western city" (Bryant and Holt 2006, 29). This fixation on live updates
for sporting events across the nation is another example of how sports media has shaped the
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 30
media landscape of America. Information began traveling faster than ever via wireless
transmissions, but it was actually a yacht race which saw one of the very first implementations of
wireless for live information transmission. Sporting events saw some of the earliest uses of the
telegraph for news reporting as well (Mott 1950, 597). As the telegraph allowed for a sense of
liveness even for remote events, it paved the way for the most significant development in sports
media prior to television: radio.
A Fixation on Liveness: Radio and Sports Consumption
Radio delivered on the push towards liveness established by the telegraph. The first
broadcast of a Major League Baseball game occurred within a year of the commercial release of
radio (Enriquez 2002, 206). Rader remarks, "Now the fan did not have to await his morning
newspaper; he instantly shared the drama transpiring on the playing field" (Rader 1984, 23). For
the first time, sports were perceived as home entertainment. Broadcasters as well as businesses
capitalized on the shift. Sports coverage was integral to the rise in popularity of radio in the
interwar period. In Rader's words,
In the pre-television era, the heroes of sports assisted the public in coping with a rapidly changing society. The sports world made it possible for Americans to continue to believe in the traditional gospel of success: that hard work, frugality, and loyalty paid dividends; that the individual was potent and could play a large role in shaping his own destiny (1984, 15).
By Rader's account, sports programming on radio delivered a much needed revitalization
of the American ideals through the transient industrial period and The Great Depression.
The rise of radio coincides with the golden age of baseball, but there was an awkward
transitional phase into the new medium while newspapers and radio both tried to define their
new boundaries. While consumers clearly desired liveness, initial radio broadcasts felt flat and
emotionless (Bryant and Holt 2006, 27). Some of the greatest blow-by-blow sports writers were
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 31
terrible at delivering a compelling radio broadcast. Sports writers were extremely adept at
creating dramas through print, but they failed to capture audiences in the early days of radio.
Oddly enough, their sports knowledge undermined their sports coverage in the new medium.
Instead, a new role emerged: the sportscaster.
In the era of radio, the performance of live sports broadcasts came with significant stakes.
Adept sportscasters were cherished more for their voices than their sports knowledge. Delivering
play-by-play depictions of sporting events takes little technical knowledge, instead the
entertainment comes from the delivery. Mandelbaum writes of early radio sportscasters, "the
broadcasters were akin to poets and troubadours who preserved and handed down the great tales
oftheir cultures by committing them to memory and reciting them publicly" (2004, 80). Delivery
was actually so important that sometimes sportscasters such as Graham McNamee, known
especially for his baseball broadcasts, were not even present at the event but instead handed
written play-by-play depictions of the game so that they could add their own dramatic and
authorial tone to the live event (Mandelbaum 2004).
Another issue during the emergence of radio was redefining the role of newspaper sports
coverage. Radio could deliver the liveness desired by sports fans and was incredibly well suited
for play-by-play commentary. Newspapers had traditionally covered the blow-by-blow report of
an event, capturing the drama through flowery language and hyperbole. With radio, the
sportscaster captured the audience's attention through the same means, bringing in even more
emotion as his voice rose and fell with the action of the contest (Enriquez 2002, 202). Sports
writers instead decided to focus on an area that radio broadcasters could not: strategy. Early
sportscasters had to focus so much on the delivery of the action that they could not elaborate on
the reasons behind certain maneuvers. Sports writers took advantage of this deficiency and began
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 32
writing articles which focused on everything around the action. From in-depth analysis of
strategy to the creation of larger than life athlete personalities, newspaper coverage of sports in
the era of radio completely changed to remain relevant.
Sports magazines also had to find a new space to occupy during radio's reign.
Completely unable to keep up with the live coverage by radio and the strategic coverage of
America's favorite sport, baseball, sports magazines instead began to focus on niche sports such
as yacht racing. The other innovation of sports magazines in the early 1930s was their addition of
full page color photographs of athletes, something that neither radio nor newspapers could offer
(Enriquez 2002, 202). They remained as an important sports medium but had been supplanted by
both radio and newspapers. Baseball's hold on the American public was so strong that the niche
sports, which were typically covered in sports magazines, hardly seemed relevant. Football in
particular rarely saw coverage anywhere other than sports magazines (Bryant and Holt 2006, 32).
Football had traditionally been seen as a college sport reserved for the wealthy, but with an
increasing number of college graduates in the U.S. and the rise of a new medium, its niche status
was about to change (Oriard 2014, vii).
The Televisual Transformation of Sport
Television's initial debut into the sports world was a colossal failure. Reaching only a
few hundred people, the first American televisual sports broadcast was a Columbia-Princeton
baseball game on May 17, 1939. Just a few years after the commercial release of the television in
the U.S., RCA's first foray into televised sport flopped. The New York Times' Orrin E. Dunlap Jr.
recounted on the following Sunday, "The televiewer lacks freedom; seeing baseball on television
is too confining, for the novelty would not hold up for more than an hour if it were not for the
commentator" (Rader 1984, 17). He goes on to say, "To see the fresh green of the field as The
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 33
Mighty Casey advances to the bat, and the dust fly as he defiantly digs in, is a thrill to the eye
that cannot be electrified and flashed through space on a May day, no matter how clear the air."
Bryant, Holt, Enriquez, and Rader attribute the failure of early televisual sports to several
factors. First, television camera technology was rudimentary and receivers were even worse
(Bryant and Holt 2006, 31; Rader 1984, 18). Viewers could hardly see the player, much less
follow the ball or action on the field. Second, television was not a commercial success upon its
release. Sets were expensive and did not offer nearly enough programming to warrant their price:
an issue that created a sort of negative loop as the television industry needed more viewers to
warrant more content yet could not supply enough content to attract more viewers. The third
factor, described by Enriquez, is the failure for broadcasters to adapt to the new medium.
Sportscasters could not actually see the video feed and casted the game as if they were still on
radio; recounting every single action that occurred on the field despite what was on viewers'
screens at home. Inexperienced camera operators had difficulty following the action and the
image rarely matched what the sportscaster was describing.
Radio sportscasters also had difficulty transitioning into the new visual medium because
they could no longer provide the same level of drama through exaggeration and hyperbole.
Where short infield ground balls could previously be described as laser-fast bullets, the viewers
at home now saw that the play was just another ordinary event. Situated somewhere in between
watching the game live at a stadium yet still sounding like radio, televisual sport had a difficult
time defining itself in the late 1930s and early 1940s. According to Rader, televisual sport
experimentation stopped completely during the Second World War (1984, 23).
With the well-established roles of radio, newspapers, and sports magazines, the revival of
televisual sport seemed to be impossible. The utter failure of televised sports in the late 1930s
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 34
into the Second World War left televisual sport in a difficult position. Sports radio's popularity
was at an all-time high in the 1940s. Baseball had captured the hearts and minds of the American
people, and famous radio broadcasters such as Bill Stern and Jack Armstrong kept them listening
with bated breath (Rader 1984, 30-3 1).
Baseball and more generally live event sports spectatorship, however, could not keep the
nation content for too long. In what has been dubbed the Sports Slump of the 1950s by Rader
and others (Bryant and Holt 2006, McChesney 1989), spectatorship had finally started to
dwindle. Television sets were making their way into homes in record numbers after World War
11. In the post-World War 11 era, pastimes shifted from inner-city, public forms of recreation to
private, home-centered forms of recreation. Sports revenue was down and change was in the air.
People could watch baseball on their television sets at home, but not many people wanted
to. As shown by the earlier quote from The New York Times, television had difficulty containing
the magic that baseball once held. Football, however, was poised to rise with the new medium. It
had been long overlooked, but football was incredibly well suited for television broadcasts. The
large, visually distinct ball and typically slow moving action provided an acceptable subject for
contemporary television camera technology (Grano 2014, 13). College football had seen a bit of
success in newspapers, but professional football had a negative reputation as a "perversion ofthe
college game played for alma mater rather than a lousy paycheck" (Oriard 2014, vii). Radio
broadcasts of football had never reached the same level of success as baseball.
Professional football seemed to be a sport without a suitable medium. As sports media
scholar Michael Oriard explains, "[o]nly television could give the professional game a national
audience, and Pete Rozelle's defining act as the commissioner who ushered in the modem NFL
was to market the league through a single television contract, rather than leaving clubs to work
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 35
out their own deals" (2014, vii). This deal with broadcasting giant, NBC, led to the NFL's great
breakout story and what would soon become the model for televised sports (Rader 1984, 85).
With the NBC still losing money on a dwindling sports fanbase, they were ready to pull the plug
on their deal with the budding NFL until the championship match between the Baltimore Colts
and the New York Giants of 1958 (Grano 2014, 13). This match, still hailed as the 'Greatest
Game Ever Played', would become the longstanding origin story of televised football. The game
went into a second overtime, pushing the broadcast into prime time on the East Coast, a slot in
which NBC never dared to place professional football. As millions of Americans tuned in for
their regularly scheduled programming, they instead found John Unitas and his Baltimore Colts
scoring the game winning touchdown after a long, hard-fought battle. Oriard, Rader, Grano,
Oates, and Furness all trace the NFL's commercial success to this one defining moment.
As compelling as origin stories often are, the truth is that many other factors lead to the
success of football in the new mass medium. New technologies such as video tape were integral
to the rise of football in America. Hitchcock argues that instant replay in particular helped with
the rebranding of professional football: "The use of video-tape gave the game of football a whole
new image... The instant replay changed football from brutal, quick collisions into graceful
leaps, tumbles and falls. It gave football an aura of art in movement. It made football attractive to
entirely new segments of the audience" (1989, 2). Where football players had once been seen as
lethargic brutes, instant replay allowed broadcasters to slow down images, dissect plays, and
highlight the athleticism of players (Rader 1984, 83-84).
Sports, with football leading the charge, were once again on the cutting edge of media
adoption. According to Dylan Mulvin, the first documented use of instant replay for review and
training purposes was in 1957 during a game between the Los Angeles Rams and the San
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 36
Francisco 49ers (2014, 49). By 1964, instant replay was a standard broadcasting technique across
all sports. The NFL's willingness to adapt to the new medium set it apart from other sports at the
time.
In addition to these technological and legal advances, Bryant and Holt as well as
McChesney argue that one particularly innovative producer reinvented sports broadcasting for
television: Roone Arledge. With ABC's full support, Arledge established television broadcasting
conventions still present today. After the 1958 Championship game between the Colts and the
Giants, ABC was scrambling to catch up to the NBC's success in televised sports broadcasting.
As Enriquez describes, "Television broadcasting affected different sports in different ways. It
devastated boxing, had mixed effects on baseball, and proved a boon to college and professional
football" (2002, 202). As NBC began to ride the wave created by the NFL, ABC looked to get in
on the action.
Arledge was given free rein to perform a complete overhaul of ABC Sports. Bryant and
Holt argue that the single most important innovation Arledge brought was the notion that a
televisual broadcast should be presented "from the perspective of what the typical fan would see
if he or she attended the game live" (Bryant and Holt 2006, 33). Arledge (2003) believed that the
broadcast should capture the essence of attending a game, not just the play on the field, but the
roar of the crowd, the cheerleaders, the marching bands, and the coaches on the sidelines. As
Enriquez describes, "under Arledge, television assumed every role previously played by print
media; it served as the primary medium for experiencing events, it provided detailed analysis,
and it gave human faces to the participants" (2002, 205). Through football, televised sports were
able to set conventions which separated them from earlier forms of media. This transition lives
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 37
on in live-streaming today as we will see later with live-streaming's adaptation rather than
transformation of televised sport.
The arrival of television meant that sports radio and print media had to redefine their role
in sports coverage. Television could deliver the liveness of radio and, with the help of
commentators and technology like instant replay, the drama and dissection of strategy found in
print media. Newspaper coverage of sports was now relegated to simple recaps. Sports
magazines on the other hand rode the success of television. As Bryant and Holt assert, "Sports
Illustratedoffers a classic example of an old medium responding to a new one" (2006, 36).
Rather than seeking out an area left uncovered by television, Sports Illustratedsupported
televised sports by providing innovative action photography and updates on the most popular
athletes and teams at the time.
Sports broadcasts of the 1960s were infused with the hopes and fears of the Cold War
era. R. Powers, a television sports scholar, suggests that sports filled a void in the American
public, "shrugging off the darker morbidities of the Cold War and McCarthyism" (1984, 118).
The re-found focus on sports as spectacle established by "the youthful theme of ABC, echoed the
Kennedy idealism of the new frontier, the sporting emphasis echoed Kennedy's image of
muscular athleticism..." (Whannel 2002, 34). Entertainment sports media, with its art-in-motion
presentation, delivered a message of newness and regeneration to American.
Through broadcasting and advertising deals, sports helped build and perpetuate the
growing conspicuous consumption movement and the capitalist ideals of post-war America.
Athletes resumed their star status. Sports stars began appearing in advertising everywhere.
Merchandising became a key part of sports promotion. Anything from replica jerseys of sports
stars to blankets and flags with team branding can be found almost anywhere in the U.S.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 38
Contemporary Sports fandom has come to mean much more than simply following a team. It
means buying a team's products, playing sports video games, joining fantasy leagues, and
watching sports entertainment television. Oates, a sports media scholar focused on the NFL,
writes that fandom has been transformed by the presentation of athletes as commodities to be
consumed selectively and self-consciously by sports fans (2014, 80). The previously subcultural
hyper-fandom activities such as fantasy football and sports video games, Oates argues, have
moved into mainstream prominence and profitability. Fans are invited to interact with athletes as
vicarious managers in fantasy sports, offering a completely new, personally tailored form of
interaction with sports organizations. This new drive for constant connection and feedback
within the sports industry culminates with live-streaming.
Live-Streaming: Constant Connection
As Oates suggests, sports fandom has fundamentally changed to reflect an increased
involvement on the part of the spectator. Athletes and personalities have become commodities
for fans to interact with. Social media, fantasy sports, and video games have created a connection
to sports stars that was never before available in other media. At any moment, a spectator can
catch highlights on ESPN, head over to forums to discuss major sporting events, or load a stream
of a match on their phone, all while tweeting at their favorite athletes with the expectation that
their words will be received on the other end.
Recent trends show a change in the sports media landscape as new platforms begin to vie
for control over sports broadcasting in the US. The NFL has recently signed a deal with Google
allowing for the streaming of games over the internet after their current contract with DirecTV
ends in 2015. This deal reflects the changing media landscape in the internet era. The rise of new
streaming platforms poses an interesting dilemma to the current media titans and new
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 39
opportunities for new forms of media sports. Thus far, using the tradition established by
McChesney, Bryant, Holt, and Rader among others, I have used sports media as a lens through
which to view particular socio-cultural moments in America. I now turn that lens towards the
contemporary sports media landscape. What can we learn about our own social moment by
looking at the use of streaming platforms for traditional sports or the arrival of e-sports as an
entirely new form of professional competition that makes use of older forms of media, but
thrives in live-streams and video on demand?
The MLB offers an early case study into the use of live-streaming for major league sports
broadcasting. The regular season in the MLB consists of 2,430 games, a staggering number
compared to the NFL's 256. The sheer number of regular season games held each year causes a
problem with over-saturation. This inundation of content lowers the value of each individual
game in the eyes of the major networks (Mondelo 2006, 283). The games that these networks
choose not to air due to scheduling conflicts previously caused many games to go unseen by fans
outside of the local media market for the two competing teams. To remedy the situation, the
MLB streamed over 1,000 regular season games online starting in 2003. The launch of MLB.tv
in 2002 allowed engaged MLB fans to continue watching content even when they did not have
access to the games through the major networks. While not initially a huge commercial success,
MLB.tv still runs today, over a decade later at a monthly subscription of $19.99 and as of 2014
incorporated both post-season games and the World Series as part of the package (MLB.tv
2015). While the MLB has not released the official revenue totals for its live-streaming service,
with 3.7 million subscribers the platform generates well over $400 million per year (MLB.tv
2013). This little-known use of live-streaming shows a hunger for immediate interaction with
sports media regardless of the available medium.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 40
Early live-streaming fundamentally looks and feels like television, but it filled a role
which network television could not: all access and constant connection to media. It took form on
a new platform, but did not truly differ from television. Early live-streaming is more like an
adaptation of television than a new medium. Rather than creating something new, the early foray
into live-streaming by the MLB simply adapted the already present broadcasting infrastructure
and applied it through a different avenue. Television is often invoked in live-streaming. If we
look at MLB.tv, the .tv signifies its connection to television, but that domain is actually the
official domain for the country of Tuvalu. Other streaming platforms like ustream.tv, twitch.tv,
MLG.tv, all based outside of Tuvalu, use the same domain to signal their televisual connection.
Live-streaming emerged at a very particular moment in the evolution of sports media.
With air-time limited on the major networks, the internet allows a near infinite amount of content
to reach sports fans. As Oates would argue, from fantasy sports, to blogs, to live-streaming, the
internet is, for many, the new space of the sports fan. Live-streaming goes beyond the ability of
other media to reach viewers wherever and whenever, whether from a home computer or a
mobile device. Live-streaming delivers on the constant connectedness expected by consumers
today. At its roots, live-streaming is a televisual medium. So what separates it from television?
Live-streaming today has created its own niche by blending other forms of media. Most
live-streams host an internet relay chat (IRC) in addition to the audiovisual component of the
broadcast. This IRC allows viewers to chat with other audience members and often the
broadcaster, a functionality not currently available in television. This live audience connection in
live-streaming is unparalleled in television. Hamilton et al., in their investigation of the
significance of live-streaming for community creation, situate Twitch streams as an important
'third place' for community. Building on the work of both Oldenberg and McLuhan, Hamilton et
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 41
al. (2014) suggest that "By combining hot and cool media, streams enable the sharing of rich
ephemeral experiences in tandem with open participation through informal social interaction, the
ingredients for a third place." The third place that the authors point to creates a rich connection
akin to interpersonal interaction. The ephemeral nature of these interactions creates a deep sense
of community even in streams with hundreds of thousands of viewers. Live-streaming and in
turn, the IRC associated with streams creates a shared experience tantamount to the "roar of a
stadium" (Hamilton et al. 2014). These streams also pull in a global audience, connecting
isolated audiences into one hyper-connected community. Live-streaming draws on television for
its look and feel, but delivers not only on the desire for liveness perpetuated in sports media but
also the hyper-connectivity present in today's globalized world.
E-sports, Live-streaming, and Sports Media
Many factors contributed to the success of live-streaming for e-sports. It arrived at a
moment when television seemed closed to e-sports, it was much less expensive to produce, and
much easier to cultivate. Television broadcasts are prohibitively expensive to produce. Early
attempts at airing e-sports on television have typically flopped, rarely surviving past a second
season. E-sports are difficult to film when compared to traditional sports and conventions had
not yet been set for the televisual presentation of e-sports (Taylor 2012). The action in traditional
sports can typically be captured by one shot. E-sports broadcasts, in contrast, must synthesize
one cohesive narrative out many different player viewpoints with varying levels of information.
In a game like CounterStrike, broadcasters must wrangle with a large map with ten players in
first-person perspective. The resulting audiovisual feed is a frantic attempt to capture the most
relevant information from the players with an outside 'observer' controlling another viewpoint
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 42
removed from the players' point of view. The observer functionality in the early days of e-sports
broadcasting created a difficult barrier to overcome for commercial success on television.
Observer functionality had not yet become a focus for game developers and commentary had not
reached the level of competency it has in more contemporary broadcasts.
Instead of finding success on television, e-sports pulls in millions of concurrent viewers
on live-streaming sites such as Twitch.tv. With television seemingly out of reach and streaming
requiring significant investment per event in the early 2000's, e-sports broadcasting remained
relatively stagnant until the arrival of a reliable, and cheap, live-streaming platform. Justin.tv
(and other similar sites like UStream and Stickam), which launched in 2007, delivered exactly
what e-sports broadcasters needed to grow. The site allowed users to quickly and easily stream
content online with the use of some relatively simple software. Both broadband internet reach
and streaming technology had developed to a point that lowered the barrier of entry for
broadcasters. Players from around the world streamed games from their bedrooms. E-sports
broadcasters reached new, massive audiences.
The success of gaming content on Justin.tv spurred a new streaming site dedicated solely
to gaming. The games-centered streaming site, Twitch.tv, launched in 2011. Twitch.tv
revolutionized the e-sports industry. Each of the casters I interviewed spent time detailing the
importance of Twitch.tv without being prompted. As one explained, Twitch.tv is "the clearest
driving factor that's grown e-sports over the past 2-3 years." As mentioned in the introduction, e-
sports audiences have reached previously unheard of levels. Large scale e-sports events regularly
see concurrent viewer numbers in the hundreds of thousands. These broadcasts still largely
resemble televised sports however, rarely, if ever, making use of the IRC.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
43
Live-streaming is just one of the forms of media the e-sports industry makes use of. In
fact, e-sports interacts with most media in the same ways that traditional sports have. The e-
sports industry pushes back into almost all of the earlier forms of media discussed in this chapter.
Print and radio typically fill a PR role in e-sports coverage. Large events or developments often
make their way into publications like The New York Times. Local radio segments will
occasionally feature summaries of e-sports events occurring nearby. Internet versions of both of
print and radio sports coverage are fundamental segments of the e-sports media ecosystem.
Podcasts, digital audio files available on the internet through downloads or streaming, vlogs, and
video diaries fill essentially the same role for e-sports that radio currently plays for traditional
sports. Experts weigh in on recent developments and players breakdown certain aspects of a
game.
E-sports journalism has also immerged as a legitimizing force within the industry. Sites
like ongamers.com and esportsheaven.com keep fans abreast of any new developments in the
professional scene for all of the major e-sports titles. Journalists like Richard Lewis add
legitimacy to e-sports through their coverage of current events. Their recaps of developments as
well as summaries of various tournaments and leagues closely resemble their print counterparts
in sports coverage. It is clear that the e-sports industry is in conversation with many forms of
media. Many of the forms and techniques are borrowed directly from sports coverage. These
forms of media did not appear instantly however, they are the result of years of push and pull
with the larger sports media landscape. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the commentating
of e-sports live-streams.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
44
Chapter 2
Shoutcasters Collecting Conventions
E-sportscasters, often referred to as shoutcasters, both look and sound like professional
sportscasters. Their attire and cadence both create an instant connection to televisual sports.
Having never seen a game of Starcraft 2 before, you may watch the flashing lights and
explosions with a perplexed look on your face. As you continue to watch, you hear two
commentators provide a narrative, stats fly across the screen, and you start to piece together the
game in front of you. After a few minutes, you know the two players who are facing off against
one another, you feel the excitement as they engage each other's armies, and a slight sting as the
player you were rooting for concedes the match with a polite "GG." The whole presentation feels
like a variant of Monday Night Football with virtual armies instead of football teams. From the
stat-tickers to the sound of the commentator's voice, you can almost imagine the ESPN or CBS
logo gracing the bottom corner of the screen. Shoutcasters have become a staple in e-sports. One
of the main signifiers of the 'sports' moniker professional gaming has taken on, shoutcasters lend
an air of professionalism to a scene which often struggles to define itself. By adopting the 'sport'
title, a precedent has been set for e-sports broadcasters which informs their style and
conventions.
Shoutcasters are important to investigate because they form a fundamental grounding for
e-sports which helps it to create its identity in the face of blistering turnover rates and constant
field shifts. E-sports stand in a unique position compared to traditional sports. Where players and
coaches in traditional sports often have careers that last for several years, e-sports personalities
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 45
suffer from intense turnover rates where professional careers can end within a year. E-sports
players burn out quickly and coaches rarely make a lasting name in the industry. The
recognizable personalities in e-sports are the few innovators and commentators who turned their
passion into a career. In this chapter, I analyze the role of shoutcasters within the larger
framework of the e-sports industry. I build much of this analysis on the foundation that Taylor
(2012) established in her investigation of the rise of e-sports. Much of Taylor's analysis still
holds true today, but some other developments in the field have created new dynamics within
shoutcasting that were not present during her initial encounters with shoutcasters. Understanding
how shoutcasters borrow from earlier forms of media, the issues they perceive within the
industry, and how they cultivate their own identity as shoutcasters while grappling with the
hyper-connection found in live-streaming as a medium allows us to grasp the relationship e-
sports broadcasting has with earlier forms of media while still creating its own identity. I begin
with a very brief look at the history of shoutcasting.
Shoutcasting History
One can see that even early attempts at broadcasting competitive gaming borrowed
heavily from its media contemporaries. Starcade,a 1982 show that ran for two years, marks one
of the first forays into e-sports broadcasting. Though the term e-sports had not yet emerged, the
show featured two opponents attempting to outscore each other on various arcade machines. If
we look to Starcade as an early example of e-sports, then the origins of e-sports commentating
resemble game show commentary found in Jeapordy! or The Price is Right. Watching Starcade
for the hosting alone reveals many similarities to other game shows: the host wears typical game-
show host garb, pleasantly explains every aspect of the competition, and speaks with the
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 46
broadcast voice we all recognize. Starcadealso shows the constant evolution of competitive
gaming coverage as it continued to refine its camera angles, presentation, and format over its two
year run.
The model which more closely resembles our modern vision of shoutcasting gained
momentum at the turn of the twenty-first century. The title shoutcaster comes from the early
streaming software used for e-sports broadcasting, SHOUTcast. While many people familiar
with e-sports may have no idea where the term comes from, a prominent shoutcaster, djWHEAT
(2012), claims that the title remains due to its signaling of the history of e-sports. SHOUTcast, a
media streaming program, arrived in 1998, allowing interested parties to broadcast audio
recordings to various 'radio' channels for free. SHOUTcast allowed for video streaming, but as
one early shoutcaster I interviewed lamented, the bandwidth and equipment required for video
streaming was prohibitively expensive.
Instead of the audiovisual broadcast we regularly associate with e-sports live-streams
today, early shoutcasters relied on audio recordings akin to early radio coverage of traditional
sports. These early broadcasts only streamed audio to a few hundred dedicated fans on internet
radio. Early shoutcasts follow the form of traditional play-by-play radio broadcasts, focused
primarily on presenting every development in the game. In interviews, veteran shoutcasters were
not shy about admitting the influence radio sportscasters had on their own style. One mentioned
that he spent hours listening to live sports radio to hone his own skills.
Early shoutcasters also performed many aspects of the production that they are no longer
required to perform in the more mature e-sports industry. They would attend events, set up their
own station, typically with their own laptop and microphone. It was a very grassroots affair.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 47
With little experience in the technical aspects of broadcasting, the productions emulated as much
as they could from sports broadcasting to lend an air of professionalism.
With the arrival of Twitch.tv, and other reliable streaming platforms, much of the onus of
production was taken off of shoutcasters. Instead of acting as producers, directors, editors, and
on-air talent all at once as they had in the early audio-only streams, shoutcasters are now more
able to focus on the portion of their work from which they get their name. Shoutcasting after the
early days of internet radio has come to not only sound like traditional sportscasting, but also
look like traditional sportscasting.
Something Borrowed: Influences from Sportscasting
Wardrobe
Many ofthe shoutcasters I interviewed talked about wardrobe as a huge change within
shoutcasting, one that was spurred entirely by looking at traditional sportscasting. Most
shoutcasters got their start wearing t-shirts and jeans at various e-sports events. Today, you will
rarely find a shoutcaster not wearing a shirt with a blazer. Looking at the image below shows the
incredible shift in shoutcasting just within the last six years. Both images feature the same
Figure 2-Left: Joe Miller at 2009 Intel Friday Game London; Right: Joe Miller at 2015 Intel Extreme Masters World Championship in Katowice Poland. Image credit: ESL, Philip Soedler and Helena Kristiansson. Flickr.com/eslphotos
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
48
shoutcaster: Joe Miller. The left-hand image comes from the 2009 Intel Friday Game London
while the right-hand image comes from the 2015 Intel Extreme Masters World Championship.
While the images are quite similar, the professionalism apparent in the right-hand image
resembles a professional sportscaster. The gamer/geek vibe found in the left-hand image has
been removed from the shoutcasting image. As a few of the shoutcasters I spoke with admitted,
the drive to rework the shoutcaster wardrobe came purely from traditional sports. On top of that,
they pointed to a desire to shed the gamer/geek stereotypes that e-sports had come to inhabit. By
adopting professional attire, they felt that they could get rid of the old image and emulate the
professionalism of a sports broadcast. Wardrobe is not the only aspect of traditional sportscasting
that has made its way into shoutcasting.
Style
One of the more elusive aspects borrowed from traditional sports is the actual
commentary style. I use the term elusive here to signal the difficulty in pinning down exactly
why shoutcasters remind us so vividly of traditional sportscasters. Early shoutcasters had no
models outside of traditional sportscasting so they took as much as they could: "So as a
broadcaster we look at traditional sportscasting. We pull from that and then make sure it fits in
game casting." As it turns out, many sports commentary conventions translate well into game
casting. As such, the first generation of casters share many similarities with television
sportscasters. Most of these early shoutcasters admit to being influenced almost entirely by
traditional sportscasters. One caster explains, "Television is where we grew up, it's what we
watched. So clearly that's where we're going to pull from."
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
49
Shoutcasters typically have no media training, instead relying on mimicry of earlier
conventions to get by. As with most positions in e-sports, and similar to early sports writers and
radio casters, shoutcasters are just passionate fans turned professional. In conversations, they
each revealed a bit of their own personal history that pushed them towards broadcasting, but only
one ever mentioned having received any sort of formal training. Years into his shoutcasting
career, he "went back and did a journalism and broadcasting course for 6-9 months." Of
particular note, he mentions, "they did one really good project which was 'how to be a news
presenter'. They taught me the basics of that." The rest, he says, he learned on-air through
experience. The other shoutcasters I interviewed echoed this story.
Most of the shoutcasters I interviewed fell into shoutcasting through happenstance and
had to learn their craft on-air. Shoutcasters are akin to the very early television sportscasters who
had to reinvent their style during broadcasts like Bob Stanton, a radio sportscaster turned
television sportscaster who would send his friends to sports bars to gather feedback and
suggestions from audience members (Rader 1984). Echoing this inexperience and improvisation,
one shoutcaster I interviewed confided, "the first time I had ever been on camera, I sat down and
I was like, 'I have no idea how to do this.' I had done two and a half years of audio casting, but I
had never done video." Another caster recalls of his first show, "All I knew going into my first
broadcast was that I know this game. I know how it works, I know these players, and I play
against these kinds of players. I don't know how commentary works, but I can do this." After
these first, trial broadcasts, both of the above-mentioned shoutcasters admitted to going back and
watching traditional sportscasters to learn more about their craft.
Other broadcasting style conventions such as how to handle dead-air, how to end a
segment, or how to transition into gameplay were lifted directly from sportscasting. Paul
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
50
"ReDeYe" Chaloner, a prominent personality within the e-sports industry, addresses each of
these techniques in his primer on becoming a professional shoutcaster, constantly pointing to various examples from traditional sports broadcasting to illustrate his points. In his section on dead-air, Chaloner writes, "[o]ne of the best pieces of advice I had for TV was from legendary
sports producer Mike Burks (11 time Emmy award winner for sports production) who told me 'A
great commentator knows when to shut up and say nothing"' (2009, 9). Chaloner uses traditional
sports broadcasting as a way to explain shoutcasting, a clear indication of its influence on e-
sports broadcasting.
Content Analysis: Play-by-play and Color Commentary in the NFL andLCS
Another convention lifted directly from traditional sports broadcasts is the arrangement
of the casting team. Traditional television sportscasters fall into one of two roles: play-by-play or
color commentary. Shoutcasters use these same two roles. Both sports broadcasts and e-sports
broadcasts feature one of each type. The play-by-play commentator narrates the action, putting
together the complicated and unconnected segments of the game into a cohesive narrative. The
color commentator provides their in-depth analysis of the game, typically from the stance of a professional player.
Shoutcasters have adopted the two-person team directly from traditional sports
broadcasts. The path to each role follows the same pattern as well. An ex-professional player
almost always fills the role of color commentary in both traditional sports and e-sports. Their
insight is unparalleled. Color commentators attempt to breakdown complex series of events or
highly technical maneuvers as if they were still a professional player. In the words of one e-
sports color commentator, "I'm not pretending to be a professional player, but I'm doing my best
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
51
to emulate them." He goes on to say, "You can read up on it and study it as much as you like, but unless you've lived it, you can't really comment on it." In comparison, a play-by-play
commentator does not need to have the technical depth, but relies more on presentation. Even
though a play-by-play commentator has most likely played hundreds of hours of whichever game
they cast, they cannot fill the role of the color commentator. This dynamic allows for play-by-
play commentators to switch games with relative ease whereas color commentators, both in
traditional sports and e-sports, are locked into one game.
To illustrate the emulation of sports broadcasting found in e-sports, I now turn to a brief
content analysis of the commentary found in a regular season NFL game and a regular season
League of Legends Championship Series game. I start with the commentary from one play in an
NFL game. After presenting the traditional model, I move to the commentary from one team
fight in League of Legends to demonstrate how the convention has been adapted for e-sports
commentary. In both cases, I have removed the names of players, commentators, and teams to
cut down on jargon and clutter. Each case exhibits the dynamic present in the two man
commentary team.
NFL
With both teams lined up, the play begins and the play-by-play commentator comes in immediately.
Play-by-play: Here's [player 1] out to midfield, a yard shy of a first down. [player 2] on the tackle.
After the play has ended, the color commentator takes over.
Color: It's been [team 1] on both sides of the ball. Whether it be defense and the way that they dominated this ball game and then offensively, the early going had
the interception, didn't get much going over the next couple of possessions offensively but since that time, [player 3] has been very precise in how he has thrown the football and they just attacked this defense every which way.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
52
LCS
Three members ofthe Red Team engage Blue Team atRed Team's turret
Play-by-play: This is going to be dangerous. Doing what he can to hold out. They're going to grab the turret, the fight will continue after the shield onto [player 1] is already broken. He gets hit, the ignite is completely killing the
ultimate! He gets hit by [player 2] who turns around again and heads back to [player 3].
With the action overfor the moment, the colorcommentatorbegins to speak
Color: I thought he finished a camp here too...
The color commentatoris cut off as two more members ofBlue Team attempt to attack.
Play-by-Play Heyo, as the top side comes in here too. [player 1], will he hit a good ultimate!? Oh! They were staring right at him but now he's just left to get shredded apart here. They couldn't have thought that this was going to go well for them.
With thefightconcluded, thecolorcommentatorcontinuesagain.
Color: Is this just the week of chaos? Because that was a really really uncharacteristic lapse in judgement from [Blue Team]: Not calling everybody into
position at the right time, and [Red Team] with the advantage make them pay for it. They didn't expect the ignite from Nautilus. I think they expected Nautilus to
have exhaust instead, but [player 1] pops the ignite, and as we said there is no armor so [player 2] just... and it continues!
The color commentator is cut off once again as the two teams engage one another for a third time.
If we look at these examples for their content rather than the specific moment in the game we can
catch a full illustration of the two-caster dynamic. As we can see by the NFL example, the play-
by-play commentator provides a running narration of the action in the game. When the action
ends, the color commentator provides the meta-level analysis of the unfolding events. In the LCS
example, we see that the same dynamic is present, however, due to the continuous action in the
game, the transition into color commentary becomes difficult. In the first lull, the LCS color
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
53
commentator tries to insert his analysis, but he is cut off by a second engagement. The color
commentator stops talking immediately and allows the play-by-play commentator to continue
describing the action. After the engagement ends, we hear the color commentator pick up again, explaining why the fight developed the way it did as well as his insight into why the teams played the way they did.
Entertainment and Narrative
Entertainment value was a repeated concept in my interviews with shoutcasters. Some
went so far as to claim that their role was only to entertain. One stated, "I want to get you
excited. I want to get you to watch the game as if it was a show on television." Many would
point to good sportscasters as an example to follow. If we recall the example of the early days of
radio sportscasting, casters had a difficult time making the transition to the new medium. Their
broadcasts felt flat when compared with their print counterparts (Bryant and Holt 2006, 27).
Early sportscasters got locked into the idea that their responsibility was to provide the basic play-
by-play depiction of a match. The golden age of sports radio was brought in by popular
sportscasters, such as Graham McNamee, who were so popular that they'd be asked to cast
games remotely. McNamee, like a live version of his print counterparts, was famous for creating
florid depictions of the game, athletes became heroes and their play became combat as told by
McNamee. While the presentation of live and accurate information was still essential, popular
radio sportscasters shifted sports media from news reports to entertainment. Sportscasters are
responsible for this shift. Without their expert embellishment, play-by-play depictions lack
entertainment value.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
54
Even non-sports fans can feel the excitement from a particularly good sportscaster. The
game they portray is far more intriguing than any actual events happening on the field (Bryant,
Brown, Comisky, and Zillmann 1982). This disconnect forms one of the primary reasons that the
transition to casting televised sport was so difficult. The small liberties that sportscasters took
were no longer acceptable in the visual medium. Once the home viewer could see the game,
commentary had to shift to accommodate more scrutiny. Radio sportscasters were notorious for
their embellishment. As Bryant, Comisky, and Zillman note from one of their several
investigations of sportscasting, roughly forty percent of commentary is dramatic embellishment
(1977). In 1977, the authors tracked the amount of hyperbole and exaggeration in sports
broadcasting and found that over half of the speech was dedicated to drama. E-sports
shoutcasters, by comparison, rarely use dramatic embellishment of action. A few of the
informants noted that they feel that embellishing actions is not possible due to their audience.
The e-sports audience as pictured by shoutcasters, includes mostly dedicated players.
While many sports fans may play their sport casually, e-sports fans engage with the games they
watch regularly. As one shoutcaster explains, "we've only ever gone out to a hardcore audience."
He acknowledges that the current audience is in flux, but the primary base of e-sports fans are
intensely dedicated viewers and players. Because of this dynamic, shoutcasters feel that
embellishment of the actions on screen would be difficult to slip past a discerning eye. Their
belief that dramatic embellishment isn't possible may say more about their understanding of
traditional sports fans than it does about their formulation of their role as commentators. While
unacknowledged in interviews, the possibility for shoutcasters to add embellishment exists. Their
choice not to use embellishment speaks more to their formulation of the e-sports audience than it
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
55
does to their casting quality. Instead of embellishment of action, shoutscasters rely on another
convention found in traditional sportscasting: narrative.
Studies that focus on the media effects of sportscasting suggest that sportscasters
fundamentally alter the audience perception of the telecast through story-telling and narrative
(Krein and Martin 2006). Sportscasters take many liberties in their descriptions of the game to
add a dramatic flair. In several empirical studies, Bryant, Brown, Comisky, and Zillman (1979)
found that when sportscasters created a narrative of animosity between players, viewers felt an
increased amount of tension and engagement. They conclude that the narrative scope of the
sportscaster is critical in the perception of sports broadcasting. This narrative creation has bled
into shoutcasting as many shoutcasters attempt to amplify the emotional content of their games
by highlighting underdog stories or hyping up animosity between players. One caster I
interviewed connected his work to the narrative creation in sports commentary by stating,
"Emotion is one of the key words in commentary. You need to be able to connect a certain
emotion to the words you're saying. You need to be able to make someone scared for their
favorite player or overjoyed when they win. Create greatest enemies. You need to be able to
make these feelings through what you say or how you say it. Emotion is everything." This caster
goes to great lengths to dig up statistics from previous matchups to provide a narrative for the
match he casts. Through this investigation, the shoutcaster is able to contextualize a match with a
rich history. Perhaps two players have met three times before and each time the result has been
the same. Will viewers be able to share in the momentous victory of the underdog? As part of
their preparation, shoutcasters will research all of the previous meetings between two players to
create a history between them, a tactic which they acknowledge has been used in traditional
sports for decades.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
56
Production
Stream production is another realm where e-sports have started to borrow heavily. While
e-sports producers may have gotten a head start on streaming live events, they often rely on the
expertise of television producers to put a show together. Multiple shoutcasters pointed to a
steady influx of television producers making their way into e-sports, "the way we approach a
production is very much like television. A lot of the production guys that are getting into it are
from television." In fact, the executive producer of the League of Legends Championship Series, an immensely popular e-sports program, is former emmy-winner Ariel Horn. Horn won his Emmy as an associate producer of the 2004 Olympics for NBC. Likewise, Mike Burks, executive producer for the Championship Gaming Series mentioned in the above quote from Paul Chaloner, had an immense amount of experience in televised sports before migrating to e- sports. These are just two of the many experienced television producers making their way into e- sports. Their style is beginning to show as e-sports events become more polished every year. If we recall the image of Prime Time League in the introduction to this thesis, we can see the influx of television conventions in e-sports from the production side. The shoutcasters benefit from the experience of working with television producers to refine their style. As the field has grown, however, we begin to see minor tweaks in style and delivery. Spending a significant time with e- sports casting, in comparison with sportscasting, reveals several distinctions. Much of this difference comes with the age of the field, but just as Starcadeevolved over its short lifespan, shoutcasters have found ways to make themselves unique. Their understanding of their role within the overall e-sports industry informs us of some of the key differences here.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
57
Something New: Shoutcaster Identity
Shoutcasters are situated somewhere between fan and professional. As evidenced by the
above investigation of how shoutcasters are informed by their traditional predecessors, the role
of shoutcasters is still very much in flux. Shoutcasters are just recently creating their own
identity separate from their sportscasting roots. In particular, the less experienced shoutcasters I
spoke with use markedly different models to inform their own casting.
The Second Generation of Professional Shoutcasters
A second generation of casters is just now coming into the scene. Instead of looking to
traditional sportscasters as their models, they emulate veteran shoutcasters: "my influences are
the streamers that I watched. I watched everyone who casts and commentates...my commentary
style comes from those guys. I don't know how much is conscious or just mimicry." This new
caster has been on the scene for only a fraction of the time that the veterans have. In that time he
has honed his shoutcasting skills not by finding sports commentary and seeing which aspects
apply to shoutcasting, but by absorbing as much information as he could from other shoutcasters.
Another fresh shoutcaster offers a fascinating disconnect from the older casters: "I definitely
bounce off more e-sportscasters than sports. I just watch more e-sports than sports. Sports are so
different than e-sports, there's so little that I can actually use from them." Where his
predecessors admit to borrowing primarily from traditional sportscasters, this new generation has
left the realm of traditional sportscasting behind.
The professional casters provide material for an amateur level of shoutcasters to pull
from. The shoutcasters I interviewed were all professionals who typically work on major events
with massive support and budgets. With a robust network of shoutcasters to pull from, however,
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
58
we may see much more support for the grassroots level of e-sports that many early fans are
accustomed to. Current shoutcasters also provide a model for potential careers. Through the
hard-fought struggle of years-worth of unpaid events, the shoutcasters I spoke with have created
a legitimate profession worth pursuing. Most warned me that the path is no longer as easy as they
once had it. Most of them pursued shoutcasting for the love of e-sports. They had years to
fumble through persona creation, broadcast techniques, and conventions.
New, potential shoutcasters are automatically held to a higher standard. A senior caster
offered the following advice, "With how casting has changed, you need to be open to casting
multiple games. You have to be willing to learn. There is a lot we can teach a caster, but you
have to have some skills within you alone. You have to have some camera presence." The
mention of camera presence signals a significant jump from early shoutcasting. Just a few years
ago, the shoutcasters I interviewed sat down in front of a camera for the first time armed with
nothing but game knowledge; camera presence was a foreign word to them.
Perhaps the most significant change to casters is their overall level of experience. Some
of the shoutcasters I spoke with have been broadcasting for over a decade. Time has allowed
these casters to experiment and find their own style. As mentioned earlier, many of the minutia
involved in running a show take time to learn. Most casters got their start casually. They may
have been passionate about e-sports and created a role for themselves within the industry. Some
are former players who made the hard decision to give up on their hopes of winning big to
instead cultivate a community.
As new professionals, shoutcasters are just now coming together with the support of e-
sports companies under legitimate full-time contracts. The professional casters I spoke with all
acknowledged a significant change in their commentary since making the transition into full-time
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
59
casting with other casters around for feedback and training. One explained that he had never
been sure how to handle dead-air, moments when both casters are silent and there is little action
in the game. Through feedback sessions with other casters, he learned that there are some
appropriate times to let the viewer formulate their own opinions on the match. Heeding the
advice of veteran casters like Paul Chaloner, he went on to explain that one of the problems he
sees in shoutcasting more generally is that shoutcasters are afraid to just be quiet during a stream.
Part of the emotional build-up of a game, he explains, is letting the natural flow of a game take
its course without any input from the casters.
It will be fascinating to watch as these expert networks inform e-sports broadcasts across
the world. One informant remarked, "Now that we're all working together, we're learning a lot
off of one another, which hasn't happened in commentary before." Beyond allowing veteran
shoutcasters to compare notes, the professional status of shoutcasting provides training to new
shoutcasters. One veteran claimed, "All the junior people are learning so much faster than we
ever did. They're taking everything we learned over 5-10 years and doing it in months." These
veteran casters can now pass on their experience and their style. Techniques like hand-offs at the
end of a segment or transitions from the desk to gameplay often came up in my interviews as
issues which take years to learn, but newer shoutcasters are able to pick these cues up from
earlier shoutcasters instead of taking what they can from a sports show and hoping that
everything translates well.
Beyond the expected roles that shoutcasters fill, they also perform many secondary tasks
which don't typically fall to traditional sportscasters. In the very early days of live-streaming, shoutcasters were often responsible for every aspect of the broadcast from set-up to teardown. Some shoutcasters still regularly assist on production aspects of the broadcast such as graphics
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
60
packages, camera set-up, and audio checks, but others leave the production aspects of the stream
to more experienced hands while focusing instead on updating websites, answering tweets, creating content, or streaming their own play sessionss. No two casters seem to fill exactly the same role within the broadcast team. They do, however, share some similarities which seem to form the shoutcaster identity.
Record-keepers and Community Managers
All of the casters pointed to stats-tracking as part of their roles outside of their air-time
responsibilities. Most of them keep highly detailed databases full of every possible stat they can
get a hold of from game clients and public databases. These stats can be as simple as wins and
losses from remote regions or LAN tournaments that do not post their results online. The stats
can also get as minute as the number of units a particular Starcraft 2 player built in one particular
match. When the data isn't readily available, shoutcasters go out of their way to curate the
database themselves. While some keep their database secret to provide a personal flair to their
casting, others find it important to share this information with their e-sports communities. One
shoutcaster recalled his surprise when he first worked with a major South Korean e-sports
company with its own dedicated stats team. He expressed that he had never realized how much
he needed a dedicated stats team like you find in traditional sports until that moment. It was then
that he realized how much of his daily routine stats curation filled. While he was grateful for the
help, he also felt personally responsible for stats collection and did not entirely trust the figures
from the professional statisticians. This example shows the difficult position e-sports fills,
constantly stuck between borrowing from traditional sports while not fully able to cope with the
maturity of the sports media industry.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
61
Another role which tends to fill a shoutcaster's daily routine is community maintenance.
Whether the caster creates their own content on gaming sites, responds to fans on social media,
or spends their time streaming and interacting with the community, they all mentioned some
form of community maintenance as part of their duties as a shoutcaster. This particular focus on
community maintenance most likely results from the grassroots origins of shoutcasters. These
casters were a part of an e-sports community long before they became shoutcasters. Whether
they view it as their professional responsibility or a social responsibility remains unclear. They
all admit to some level of e-sports advocacy, however. They view PR, and the proliferation of e-
sports as part of their responsibilities. The most effective way to tackle this issue, many of them
have decided, is through community engagement. The community aspect of shoutcasting identity
leads me to a discussion of the affordances of the hyper-connectivity in live-streaming.
Grappling with the Hyper-Connectivity in Live-streaming and E-sports
Shoutcaster Connection
I have yet to meet anyone in the e-sports industry who has not remarked on the unique
level of connection present in e-sports. Shoutcasters especially, tap into the network created in
these online communities. In a representative summary of my conversations, one shoutcaster
explained, "the connectedness is so unique in e-sports. The way that we can interact with fans
instantly. The players at the end of the day are gamers, they know exactly where to look.
They've got Twitter, they go on Facebook, they post on Reddit." Audience members connect
ephemerally in the IRC of a Twitch stream, but they constantly scour the social media outlets of
their favorite stars, e-sports companies, and shoutcasters, creating a deeply connected
community. Professional shoutcasters understand that the e-sports communities operate in a
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
62
unique way when compared to traditional sports fandom. E-sports fans have an odd connection
to franchises or teams within their chosen e-sport. As mentioned before, turnover rates and
general industry growth force entire communities to radically reform from one season to another.
Where traditional sports fans often follow a team based on geographic loyalty, or
familial connections, e-sports fans do not have that option. While you will often hear of fans
cheering for teams in their geographic region (North America, Europe, South-East Asia, etc) if
they make it to the last few rounds of an international tournament, they may also base their
fandom off of a team logo, or a particular player instead. Shoutcasters recognize this dynamic
and use it to cultivate the community.
Communication, they claim, separates them from traditional sports broadcasts or even
news anchors: "We communicate more with our audience than you'll see TV news anchors or
celebrities, but it's part of our job to get more information out there." The focus on
communication seems to be unique to shoutcasters as the majority of it happens outside of their
broadcasts. While many shoutcasters define their role on-screen as an educator of sorts, the
notion of spreading information about e-sports falls outside of their screen time. This double role
of broadcaster and community manager extends what media scholars have dubbed the
broadcasting persona beyond the point typically associated with sportscasters or news anchors.
Shoutcasters and Persona
Horton and Wohl (1956), two social scientists who study mass media, make the assertion
that mass media performers make a conscious decision to create and maintain parasocial
interactions through the creation of a persona. Social scientists have coined the term parasocial
interaction for the intangible connection which most of us feel to some form of media or another.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 63
Standing in contrast to interpersonal interaction, a person to person exchange between two real
and cognizant human beings, parasocial interaction is instead a unidirectional relationship
(Miller and Steinberg 1970). The feeling of connection we create with fictional characters, news
anchors, or sports stars does not fall within the definition of an interpersonal interaction. Whether
mediated through a screen or the pages of a book, a parasocial interaction does not manifest in an
exchange of thoughts or words between individuals. Rather, it is embodied and lived through one
individual. Schiappa et al. (2007) conducted a meta-analysis of parasocial interaction literature to
better understand how broadcasters 'hook' viewers to a certain show. They concluded that
parasocial interactions can create and prolong connection to television programming. While
Schiappa et al. concede that there are a few opportunities for a parasocial interaction to result in
interpersonal relationships in the physical world, the compelling issue is the establishment of
intimacy mediated through means well outside of a person to person context.
Horton and Wohl set out with the goal of creating a term for the relationship between
performers and their audience in mass media. The authors suggest that the emergence of mass
media created an illusion of connection to performers which was previously unavailable. They
argue that the connection people feel to mass media stars is analogous to primary social
engagement. If this type of engagement takes place in radio and television, where users have no
opportunity to interact with audience members who are not co-present, it follows that the
interaction between broadcasters, their audience, and one another in a Twitch stream is a
particularly deep connection even beyond the level noticed by Horton and Wohl.
Shoutcasters create a familiar face and personality for audience members to connect with.
Mark Levy (1979), another proponent of parasocial interaction who focused his work on news
anchors, suggests that both news anchors and sportscasters help to create and maintain
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 64
communities through regular scheduling, conversational tones, and the creation of a broadcasting
persona. Shoutcasters perform this same role to even greater effect due to the constant changes
surrounding the e-sports industry. The regularity and consistency of shoutcasters' broadcasts
helps to foster a feeling of genuine connectedness within the community.
Although difficult to quantify, many conversations with shoutcasters turned to the odd
feeling of connection that e-sports fans feel towards one another. One shoutcaster attempted to
explain this connection by stating, "[w]henever I go to an event, I realize that fans are just
friends I haven't met yet." I found this statement to be particularly poignant. It hints to the sort of
intangible connection e-sports industry personalities and fans feel to one another through live-
streams. Anecdotally, this air of friendship permeated e-sports events that I have attended and
went well beyond what I have felt at traditional sporting events or concerts.
Previously, persona creation and maintenance occurred on-screen or at events only.
Social media has forced many media personalities to extend their personas beyond the long-held
notions of broadcaster-fan interaction. In many ways, shoutcasters must go beyond even these
extended boundaries into a near constant persona maintenance because of their roles in live-
streaming and community maintenance. Many shoutcasters give up their personal, off-air time to
stream their own gameplay or to create video content which necessarily prolongs the amount of
time they embody their broadcast persona.
I found that shoutcasters create a variation on the broadcast persona. Rather than a full-
blown broadcasting personality which they inhabit while on-air, most shoutcasters have found
that between community management, social media interactions, and broadcasts, they almost
never get an opportunity to step out of their role as a shoutcaster. Due to this near constant
connection, most shoutcasters acknowledge that they act differently on air, but they tend to
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting 65
simply invoke a more upbeat and charismatic version of themselves. Echoed in each of the
interviews, the casters point to the idea of excitement, "you have to get excited for the person out
there watching." Even if they are not in the mood to shoutcast, or they have had a bad day,
shoutcasters must leave their personal issues out of the broadcast. This aspect of the
shoutcaster's personality comes out in all of their interactions on social media as well.
Most of the shoutcasters I interviewed situated their role in e-sports as somewhere
between Public Relations, Marketing, and Community Management. One of the casters
explained the importance of invoking the broadcast persona when speaking about sponsor
expectations: "We're working in an industry with companies behind us, we can't always say
exactly what we want to say." Shoutcasters' acknowledgement of their involvement in securing
sponsorships signals an interesting shift in the e-sports industry: the focus of the broadcast team
on potential revenue generation. I turn now to an analysis of the revenue streams found in both
traditional sports and e-sports broadcasting.
    
 E-Sports Broadcasting
66
Chapter 3
Revenue
Funding Professional Play
After situating e-sports broadcasting within the greater sports media landscape,
particularly in conventions, casting, and use of medium, it is important to analyze the portions of
sports media production that have made their way into e-sports broadcasting. If we acknowledge
the influence that traditional sports broadcasting has had on e-sports broadcasting in the realms
of conventions and casting, we must also understand the importance of this relationship at the
production and economic levels. In this chapter I discuss how the history and development of the
sports media industrial complex in the U.S. has bled into the economics of the e-sports industry.
In particular, I focus on how sports media models inform the e-sports industry while portions of
the sports industry's revenue streams remain out of reach for e-sports broadcasters. Despite the
reshuffling of the sports media industrial complex mentioned in the introduction to this thesis,
traditional sports broadcasting still relies on the same revenue streams that it had in the past.
Traditional sports producers have fully capitalized on the commodification of their content. E-
sports producers, in contrast, are still shaping their revenue streams within live-streaming. The
commercialization found in the sports media industrial complex has taken hold of the e-sports
industry in several notable ways. Following in the example set by Stein's thesis work, it is not
enough to just acknowledge the relationship between e-sports and traditional sports media, we
must also understand the path which brought e-sports broadcasting to its current state.