A number of notes, emails, and presentations from Microsoft were made public due to a lawsuit filed against the company after the launch of Windows Vista. The Windows Vista era of Microsoft was plagued by bugs, delays, compatibility problems, and a general shrugging of shoulders from computer users. Microsoft reduced the graphics requirements for new Windows XP machines to receive the "Vista capable" designation, which signaled their suitability to run what was then the upcoming version of the operating system. Microsoft lowered the graphics requirement to help Intel "make their quarterly earnings, so they could continue to sell motherboards with 915 graphics embedded". As a result of lowering the graphics requirements, many of the Windows Vista qualified XP machines were unable to run Vista's signature features, with user's instead getting a stripped down version of the operating system, which caused confusion and challenges. The internal emails offer a vivid glimpse into what was happening inside Microsoft during this time. Highlights of these emails include then-CEO Steve Ballmer providing tech support to then-Microsoft board member Jon Shirley, who was struggling to get his scanners to work with Windows Vista due to a lack of drivers. Steven Sinofsky, the executive who was brought in to lead Windows development after repeated delays with Windows Vista, wrote about his own problems with Vista, as well as some insights he picked up from listening to customers at a Best Buy store. There is also a page of notes from an unidentified executive outlining the challenges of Microsoft's two-tiered approach to the Windows Vista versions. There is also documents pertaining to Dell's Windows Vista launch post mortem, which the PC maker prepared for a meeting with Microsoft's team. One of the slides shows how hard it is to say something good about Windows Vista. There is also a bona-fied Harvard Business School case-study about Windows Vista, which was published in 2009 by then-Harvard professor Ben Edelman. As the writer was dusting off old computers searching for audio from past-interviews, they stumbled upon a long-forgotten archive of Internal Microsoft emails, presentations, and notes, circa 2005-2007, which details the troubled Windows Vista-era. All of these documents were made public as a result of a lawsuit that was filed a few years after the launch of Windows Vista. The reason all these documents are being revisited is because Microsoft's 50th anniversary is next year, which they say is the perfect time to reconsider its history, and to take a new look at where the company is going. Many amazing moments from Microsoft's past will be remembered and celebrated to mark this milestone, however, the failure of Windows Vista will not be one of them. The writer of the article managed to find several pieces of audio from interviews they had with Bill Gates and Steve Ballmer, which they offered to Acquired's Ben Gilbert to help with his research for the Microsoft Volume II series. Ben Gillbert and co-host David Rosenthal are known for getting extensive background material for their show, which explorers the history and strategies of well known businesses and brands.