Helen Steel and Dave Morris joined “London Greenpeace” in 1980. The organization was not connected to international Greenpeace; rather it was an independent activist group that campaigned for social change on a broad range of issues.  One of the group’s projects was the distribution of a pamphlet that was published in 1986, entitled “What’s Wrong with  McDonald’s". McDonald’s hired private detectives to infiltrate the organization, and ultimately threatened to sue the individuals who were distributing the pamphlets.2  In order to avoid being sued for libel, three of the five apologized, and in 1990 promised to stop distributing the pamphlets. But Ms. Steel and Mr. Morris, who have been dubbed the “McLibel 2,” refused.3 No doubt this obstinacy was not expected, as McDonald’s had apparently been successful in the past in stopping criticism and forcing apologies from much more affluent foes, including the BBC.4 McDonald’s U.S. and its U.K. affiliate (“First Plaintiffs” and “Second Plaintiffs” respectively) filed suit against Morris and Steel.  The more than two and a half-year trial, the longest in English history, began in June of 1994, after twenty-eight pre-trial hearings.5  In June of 1997, in a 750 page judgment, Justice Rodger Justice Bell found that McDonald’s had been defamed and assessed damages equivalent to $96,000 against the two defendants.6 the company.8 It is not very likely that McDonald’s will ever recover its $96,000, as Mr. Morris is an unemployed former postal worker and Ms. Steel is a part time bartender.7  But the president of McDonald’s U.K. testified that this was not about money—it was about preventing lies being used to try to “‘smash’” the company. The recovery would not come close to compensating McDonald’s for its costs in the law suit, which have been estimated to be about $10 million, including over £ 6,500 per day of trial for their team of top English libel lawyers.9 satisfied,”10 Although a McDonald’s official commented that they were “broadly some have suggested that it was at best a Pyrrhic victory.11  The case became a public relations disaster around the world, thanks in large part to the Internet, which now has a very active anti-McDonald’s website.  The site displays the offending pamphlet as well as even more derogatory comments about McDonald’s, including some allegations from other sources that McDonald’s had previously successfully suppressed by threats of law suits. ce.17  When Justice Bell finally released his judgment, it included some rather detrimental conclusions about McDonald’s business practices. Although Justice Bell found in favor of McDonald’s on nearly all of their claims, he did reject a few.  He concluded that McDonald’s had contributed to cruelty to animals, used advertising to manipulate children, and paid employees so little as to depress wages in the catering industry in England. These findings were prominently reported in numerous articles describing the judgement. The statements found to be defamatory included assertions in the pamphlet that McDonald’s was destroying rain forests; causing starvation in the Third World; producing litter in cities; causing heart disease, cancer and food poisoning; subjecting employees to “bad” working conditions; exploiting women and minority workers; and covering up the low quality of their food with advertising gimmicks aimed at children.19 Morris and Steel faced formidable obstacles under English law due to a combination of restrictive substantive libel laws, denial of a jury trial, the potential for very high damage awards and legal costs,43 and a lack of legal aid.  The exclusion of defamation actions from the otherwise rather generous legal aid system in England44 is based on the fear of frivolous petty suits.45 Reformers have convincingly disputed this rationale;46 but in any event, the McDonald’s case aptly demonstrates the severe disadvantage the rule imposes on defendants of modest means being sued by affluent plaintiffs.  England’s strict liability libel law contributes to its reputation as a haven for libel plaintiffs. The $96,000 award given by Justice Bell in McDonald’s was, by these standards, quite modest.  But a company with annual earnings of $32 billion does not sue defendants like Morris and Steel for the money.  They were suing to stop the criticism and deter future critics, and their track record in squelching criticism by threatened civil suits in England had been quite good until they faced the “McDonald’s 2.