Best no-annual-fee credit cards
 The best credit cards with no annual fee give people a chance to earn rewards and build credit without breaking the bank.
 

 Chase Freedom Flex℠: With no annual fee, you won’t have to pay for bonus cash back. Find out what others think in member reviews of Chase Freedom Flex℠.
 Chase Freedom Unlimited®: For a card with no annual fee, you could earn quite a bit of cash back for your everyday purchases. Take a look at our review of Chase Freedom Unlimited® to see how.
 Citi Double Cash® Card: You’ll earn cash back at a high rate overall without paying an annual fee. Learn more in our review of the Citi Double Cash® Card.
 Best cash back credit cards
 The best cash back credit cards offer reward categories that fit your spending habits.
 

 Chase Freedom Flex℠: You can maximize your cash back in a new bonus category every quarter. Check out reviews to see what members think of Chase Freedom Flex℠ and learn more about the current bonus categories.
 Chase Freedom Unlimited®: This card is worth a look if you want a high rewards rate on everyday purchases and several bonus categories. Take a look at our Chase Freedom Unlimited® review to learn more.
 Citi Double Cash® Card: This card makes earning cash back simple with a flat rate on all purchases. Find out more in our review of Citi Double Cash® Card.
 Best travel credit cards
 The best travel credit cards could help you save up for a future vacation.
 

 Bank of America® Premium Rewards® credit card: Quality rewards and several valuable perks give this card a nice value for the annual fee. Find out what sets this card apart in our review of the Bank of America® Premium Rewards® credit card.
 Chase Sapphire Preferred® Card: The flexible travel rewards could help you book your next vacation through one of Chase’s airline or hotel partners. Take a look at our Chase Sapphire Preferred® Card review to see how.
 Capital One Venture Rewards Credit Card: The straightforward rewards program could help travelers get value for their purchases without too much extra effort. Check out our Capital One Venture Rewards Credit Card review to learn more.
 Best rewards credit cards
 The best rewards credit cards reward you for everyday purchases.
 

 Blue Cash Preferred® Card from American Express: Regular grocery shoppers will get plenty of opportunities to earn extra cash back. Learn more about Blue Cash Preferred® Card from American Express to see if this card might make sense for you.
 Capital One Venture Rewards Credit Card: You’ll get a steady rewards rate on every purchase and a straightforward redemption process for travel. Learn more in our Capital One Venture Rewards Credit Card review.
 Best low-interest credit cards
 These best credit cards with 0% intro APR offers are good for people who run into unexpected expenses or need to finance a major purchase.
 

 BankAmericard® credit card: This card features a lengthy, useful interest offer. Take a look at our review of BankAmericard® credit card to learn more.
 Citi Simplicity® Card: This card also gives you a strong intro offer to pay off your new purchases. Find out how in our Citi Simplicity® Card review.
 U.S. Bank Visa® Platinum Card: You could maximize the time you have to pay back new purchases without being charged interest. See how in our review of the U.S. Bank Visa® Platinum Card.
 Best balance transfer credit cards
 The best balance transfer cards offer options and flexibility to people trying to pay off credit card debt.
 

 Citi® Diamond Preferred® Card: This card provides more time to transfer your balances after approval. Learn more in our Citi® Diamond Preferred® Card review.
 Citi Simplicity® Card: This card offers time to pay off your balance — and it has no penalty interest rates. Take a look at our review of Citi Simplicity® Card to learn more.
 U.S. Bank Visa® Platinum Card: This card could be a great option if you’re looking for extra time to pay off your balance. Check out our review of U.S. Bank Visa® Platinum Card to learn more.
 Best credit cards for building credit
 The best credit cards for building credit give people with limited credit histories the opportunity to raise their scores.
 

 Discover it® Secured Credit Card: You’ll need to pay a security deposit, but this card offers rewards and the chance to graduate to an unsecured card. Learn more about Discover it® Secured Credit Card.
 Petal® 1 Visa® Credit Card: You’ll get a chance to build credit without being charged an annual fee or security deposit. Read Petal® 1 Visa® Credit Card member reviews for more takes.
 Petal® 2 Visa® Credit Card: You’ll have the opportunity to earn quality rewards while you build credit. Take a look at our Petal® 2 Visa® Credit Card review to learn more.
 Best secured credit cards
 The best secured credit cards give people access to credit when they might not be able to qualify for other cards.
 

 Citi® Secured Mastercard®: This card lets you track your progress as you build credit with access to a free FICO score. Check out our review of Citi® Secured Mastercard® to learn more.
 Discover it® Secured Credit Card: You could earn rewards while building credit. Read more about Discover it® Secured Credit Card.
 Capital One Platinum Secured Credit Card: You can build credit, and you might qualify to pay a security deposit that could be lower than your credit line. Take a look at our Capital One Platinum Secured Credit Card review to learn more.
 Best student credit cards
 The best student credit cards give students a head start on building credit.
 

 Bank of America® Travel Rewards credit card for Students: You could build credit and earn rewards to use while studying abroad or taking a spring break trip. Find out more in our Bank of America® Travel Rewards credit card for Students review.
 Discover it® Student Cash Back: You could build credit and earn rewards. See what others think about this card by reading member reviews of Discover it® Student Cash Back.
 How to pick the best credit card for you
 Picking the best credit card depends on where you are in your credit journey. Take a look at each of these scenarios to see which type of card suits your needs best.
 

 Do you want to build credit?
 If you’re new to credit or you’re trying to bounce back from previous financial mishaps, your top priority should probably be to build credit. Unfortunately, the credit cards with the most rewards and lowest interest rates might not be available to you just yet.
 

 But you can still find and apply for cards that you may be more likely to get approved for. That can help give you a better chance of avoiding the hard credit inquiry that comes with applying for a card and then being rejected.
 

 Consider a secured card or an unsecured card meant to build credit. These options can help you build credit as long as you pay off your statement balance in full by the due date. Just make sure the card issuer reports your payments to the three major consumer credit bureaus.
 

 Do you want to finance a big purchase or pay off debt?
 If you think you might need to carry a balance or finance a major purchase, you might want to look for a card with a low purchase APR. A card with an introductory 0% APR offer on purchases could be a good way to save money on interest.