Annual Letter to Shareholders
Dear Shareholders,
the Global McFamily
and our Customers,
At McDonald’s, we are privileged to be active
participants in the local communities where we live,
work and serve. That means we refect the values and
understand the needs of the customers and people we
strive to put frst every day. This was especially prudent
as we navigated the COVID-19 pandemic and societal
challenges within this past year. Through it all, and with
the strength of our McFamily and a values-led mindset,
we did the right thing from the start. We prioritized
the safety of restaurant crew and customers; we took
important steps to preserve our fnancial fexibility; we
leveraged the power of our supply chain; and we stood
by and supported our local communities.
I believe frmly that our Brand will be defned by how
we respond to such challenges, both as the world’s
largest restaurant company—and as good neighbors.
At the onset of the pandemic, I laid out fve principles
that McDonald’s used to guide our approach to this
historic challenge:
Supported by these principles and energized by the
incredible courage and efort from people across our
three-legged stool, McDonald’s delivered a resilient
performance in what was the most difcult year in
our history.
“We’re all in this together”
“Think and act with a long-term mindset”
“ Be transparent with each other
and our stakeholders”
“Lead by example”
“Stay true to our purpose”

Annual Letter to Shareholders
Emerging from 2020 in a position
of strength
While conditions were challenging in most markets, we still
achieved nearly $20 billion in full year revenue and over $90
billion in full year Systemwide sales. We were well-positioned
to efectively navigate such challenging circumstances
because of our operating model, our focus on running great
restaurants and our many competitive strengths, including
our formidable Drive Thru presence. We also were wellpositioned due to the signifcant investments we’ve made in
recent years to develop our digital and delivery capabilities,
which proved to be a boon throughout the pandemic.
The US delivered its sixth consecutive year of positive
comparable sales, and average US franchisee restaurant
operating cash fow reached an all-time high in 2020, after
a previous all-time high in 2019. Elsewhere, Japan and
Australia posted fve and seven consecutive years of positive
comparable sales growth, respectively. Markets that had
to signifcantly reduce operations or face closures due
to government restrictions did so with remarkable agility
and care. Their ability to respond quickly to the external
environment was a further demonstration of our System’s
unmatched execution prowess.
While 2020 was a historically
demanding year, it has helped
McDonald’s to do everything better.
We engaged Mayo Clinic to provide ongoing expertise on
emerging science in COVID-19 infection prevention, and we
devised new ways to safely and reliably serve our customers.
This, in turn, allowed us to continue gaining market share
in most major markets. We also improved on our already
unrivaled Drive Thru capabilities and continued to see the
enormous benefts of contactless delivery, take-away, and
curbside pick-up. Meanwhile, more customers used our app
than ever before, as digital sales reached nearly 20 percent
of Systemwide sales across our top six markets.
At the outset of the pandemic, we committed to helping every
operator and partner survive the crisis. We took prudent,
quick action designed to prevent not a
single Owner/Operator from failing due to
the pandemic. We ofered franchisees nearly
$1 billion in short-term fnancial liquidity
support through rent and royalty deferrals,
along with timely, targeted, and temporary
assistance to individual franchisees in
the most precarious situations. Thanks to
our quick decision-making and our robust
balance sheet, the fnancial health of the
McDonald’s System remains strong.
Just as important, we addressed our shortterm challenges without sacrifcing our
long-term priorities. We continued to invest
in our Brand, including an incremental $200
million in marketing support to widen our
market share gains and accelerate our
recovery. We also opened nearly 1,000 new
restaurants globally, modernized another 900
restaurants in the US, and together with our
franchisees, we invested more than $1 billion
in technology and digital initiatives.
I said several times through the year that we
were confdent McDonald’s would be just as
strong coming out of the pandemic as we
were going into it, and we are proving that in
so many ways.
A new, holistic growth strategy
to refect the changing
environment
Motivated by our resilience in the face of
unprecedented challenges, we began writing
the next chapter for McDonald’s as we shared
our new growth strategy, Accelerating the
Arches. Alongside bold business objectives,
the strategy articulates a clear vision of where
and how we intend to make a diference in the
world, refecting the changing expectations
that today’s customers have of modern
corporations like McDonald’s. 
Annual Letter to Shareholders
It is especially encouraging to see the
power of the three pillars coming together
already. The launch of Famous Orders in
the US, for example, brought together the
strength of our marketing, the popularity of
our core menu items and enormous digital
engagement to drive signifcant sales in
the third and fourth quarters of 2020. The
success of this initiative was just a glimpse
of what is possible and we are excited for
what is to come.
We already knew customer habits and expectations were
changing going into 2020. The pandemic accelerated some of
those changes and brought other powerful truths into focus.
First, our customers’ needs are diferent than they were
prior to the pandemic, so the experience we ofer must
adapt. A world with less dine-in and more takeout plays to
our signifcant advantage in Drive Thru and our growing
capabilities in delivery and curbside pick-up. More lunch and
dinner visits are well-suited to our core menu, with iconic
favorites that people love. Greater dependence on technology
bodes well for McDonald’s fast-growing digital experience
and our inherent scale advantages.
This understanding was essential as we identifed three new
growth pillars to deliver our next phase of sustainable growth
under Accelerating the Arches. They are easy to remember…
just think M-C-D:
Leading with our purpose and
refreshing our values to guide
our strategy
The second truth is that people expect
more from corporations today and are
seeking brands that refect their own values.
Customers want to see that the McDonald’s
they visit locally matches how we act globally.
They want and expect us to be a force for
good everywhere.
The strength of McDonald’s business
entering 2020 and our resilience through
the pandemic allowed us to broaden our
perspective to make Accelerating the
Arches a strategy focused on more than
just business performance. It is rooted in
our belief that our next chapter of growth
depends not just on what we do, but how we
do it in more than 39,000 local restaurants
around the world.
Meeting the needs of our customers and
communities requires us to embrace a
bigger, more holistic vision. Just as our
timeless commitment to Quality, Service,
Cleanliness, and Value has been refned over
the years to make them relevant for each era,
the language we use to express our purpose,
mission, and values must be reinvigorated
to ensure it is responsive to today’s
McDonald’s is one of the world’s most recognized brands,
and we invest about $4 billion per year in marketing.
Working with our agency partners, we will raise our
creative ambition and capitalize on evolving digital
behaviors to deepen the connection with our customers
to drive growth.
M - Maximize our Marketing
McDonald’s menu is known around the globe, and
customers love favorites like the Big Mac®, Chicken
McNuggets®, and of course, our World Famous Fries®.
During the pandemic, we focused on these classics and
were reminded not only of customers’ enduring passion
for these products, but also the signifcant growth
opportunities that still exist within our core menu.
C - Commit to the Core
Digital, Delivery and Drive Thru. Customers have always
loved McDonald’s for its convenience, and new technologies
ofer us the opportunity to make the McDonald’s experience
even faster and easier. We will innovate in these service
channels to unlock even more growth.
D - Double Down on the Three Ds

Annual Letter to Shareholders
Serve
We put our customers and people frst
Integrity
We do the right thing
Family
We get better together
Community
We are good neighbors
Inclusion
We open our doors to everyone
environment. That’s especially true in an era when customers
and communities expect more of us. That is why one of
our priorities over the past year was to ensure our purpose,
mission, and values refect the role we play in society today—
while embracing the vital place these timeless ideals and
principles occupy as an essential part of this special Brand
we all love.
In speaking to franchisees, customers and crew around
the world, it became clear that McDonald’s purpose is to
feed and foster communities. It also became clear in those
conversations that our ability to deliver on our purpose is
rooted in a refreshed set of core values:
Ray Kroc used to talk constantly about our values. He knew
that in a System where every restaurant is unique and locally
owned, our values would be the light that guides us through
every decision. These refreshed values are a foundational
component of Accelerating the Arches and will guide us in
achieving our business objectives while providing a common
compass for how we serve our communities, and one another.
With its holistic view of what McDonald’s seeks to accomplish
as an organization, Accelerating the Arches will strengthen
our advantages and deliver value—not only to our business,
but to our communities, customers, franchisees, crew,
employees, farmers and suppliers.
Looking forward to another
year of progress
We are a stronger Brand for the challenges
we faced together in 2020. Our business
performance and the trust we fostered
throughout our communities reinforced our
confdence in McDonald’s long-term success.
As a result, we were pleased to continue the
company’s more than 40-year tradition of
annual dividend increases.
While 2020 was a year beset with obstacles,
it was also a year of progress for McDonald’s,
and it has emboldened us to build on the
platform we created to write our next great
chapter together. Supported by a bold new
strategy and our enduring foundation of
running great restaurants, McDonald’s will
continue to strive to be a force for good in
our communities while strengthening and
widening the competitive advantages that
help us make delicious feel-good moments
easy for everyone.
Thank you to our shareholders for your
continued investment in McDonald’s, to our
customers for giving us the opportunity to
serve you and your communities, and to the
people in the McDonald’s System who make
this business what it is and give us the spirit
to succeed.
Be well.
Chris Kempczinski
President and CEO
McDonald’s Corporation