** TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER AGREEMENT **

Technology Transfer Agreement

between

Merck KGaA (“Merck”),

Frankfurter Strasse 250, 64271 Darmstadt

and

Nitec Pharma AG (“Nitec Pharma”)

Switzerland

Preamble

Merck has been marketing corticoids (Fortecortin, Decortin, Decortin H, Solu Decortin H) successfully – primarily in Germany – for many years. In order to support the corticoid business Merck started developing Prednison Night Time Release in 1998, which is a novel galenic formulation using the active agent prednison. For the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (“RA”) the Project (as defined hereinafter) has not yet entered phase 3 of clinical testing.

Merck due to limited resources and its focus on other business areas is unable to develop the Project until it is ready for marketing or to obtain a legal pharmaceutical licence for the Project. Merck therefore internally has decided to discontinue the Project.

It now appears that Nitec Pharma may be able to resume the Project at its own cost and risk, see it through phase III clinical testing and obtain a license to market the Merchandise (as defined below) in Germany, Austria and other countries.

In light of this development Merck is willing to transfer the Project to Nitec Pharma by turning over to Nitec Pharma all know-how acquired within the framework of and in connection with the Project and all pertinent industrial property rights. In particular Merck is willing to grant Nitec Pharma access to all data, which have accrued within the framework of the Project development and which are still to accrue pending the conclusion of the successful “Mutual Recognition Procedure”.

As provided herein Nitec Pharma is willing to undertake to use all of its Commercially Reasonable Efforts (as defined below) to continue the clinical and technical development of the Project on its own, in particular using its own financial resources and at its own company risk and to obtain legal pharmaceutical approvals for relevant markets that have been identified by Nitec Pharma as promising markets and to confirm that Merck shall, under the terms specified in greater detail in section 6 hereof retain the right to market the Merchandise on an exclusive or non-exclusive basis in Germany and Austria and that such right shall only pass to Nitec Pharma as set forth in section 6 hereof.

For this purpose the parties stipulate as follows:

1.	Definitions
“Technology Transfer Agreement” or “TTA” refers to this Agreement between Merck and Nitec Pharma.

“Clinical Development” refers to the implementation of all clinical trials aimed at obtaining licences to market the Merchandise in Germany, Austria and other countries.

“Commercially Reasonable Efforts” means those efforts and resources that Nitec Pharma would use were it developing, manufacturing, promoting and detailing the Active Agents as its own pharmaceutical products but taking into account clinical development results (including all safety, efficacy and cost issues), product labeling, regulatory review and approval issues, market potential, past performance, market potential, economic return, the general regulatory environment and competitive market conditions in the therapeutic area, all as measured by the facts and circumstances at the time such efforts are due.

“Technical Development” refers to the implementation of all technical activities aimed at obtaining licences to market the Merchandise in Germany, Austria and other countries.

“Approval” refers to the date on which an approval to market the Merchandise is granted in Germany and/or Austria.

“Launch” refers to the day on which the Merchandise is brought onto the market in Germany and/or Austria.

“Access to Data” refers to access to all data within Merck or affiliated enterprises of Merck within the meaning of § 15 of the German Stock Corporation Act (“Merck Group”) concerning the Project as well as concerning the Project periphery (e.g. Decortin, Decortin H), which are required or useful within the framework of Nitec Pharma’s activities described in this Agreement.

“Initial Application” is the date on which the first application for a legal pharmaceutical licence for the Project is filed in a country, which is a member of the European Union.

“Ex-factory Price” is the list price of the product without discounts by Merck Group to each independent customer.

“Production Costs” are all costs incurred by Nitec Pharma in the complete provision of Merchandise to one of Merck’s supply depots.

“Patents” refer to all of Merck Group’s patents and/or applications and utility models with respect to the Project.

“Project” refers to the galenic formulation containing Active Agents and which releases the latter in a delayed manner as more specifically described in Annex I.

“Merchandise” refers to the primary and secondary project packed and released for marketing.

“Bulk-Ware” refers to the galenic formulation approved for marketing, which still needs to undergo primary and secondary packing.

 

2

“Packing Instruments” comprises primary and secondary packing for Merchandise.

“Rheumatoid Arthritis” refers to the indication for which Nitec Pharma initially endeavours to obtain Approval.

“Active Agents” refer to Prednison, Prednisolon and Methylprednisolon.

“Skye Pharma” shall mean Skye Pharma AG with its head office in Muttenz, Switzerland, is the company, which has participated in the development of the Project from the technical aspect and which is meant to undertake production of the bulk-ware at its Lyon production site.

“Jagotec” shall mean Jagotec AG, a Swiss corporation having its head office at Eptingerstr. 51 in CH-6052 Hergiswil, Switzerland.

“Option Area” are the national territories of Germany and Austria.

 

2.	Third Party Contracts
 

2.1.	Merck, subject only to the restriction set forth specifically in section 6 hereof, hereby assigns to Nitec Pharma the agreement attached hereto as Appendix 2.1 “Skye/Jagotec DLA”) between Merck and SkyePharma/Jagotec concerning the development and production of the Project, on the precondition that SkyePharma /Jagotec shall give its required consent thereto. For the purpose of said assignment, Merck shall continue the agreement until then.
 

2.2.	The content of the agreement with SkyePharma/Jagotec is known to Nitec Pharma. All documents pertaining thereto, including correspondence concerning the agreement as well as other documents, which are useful for the implementation and interpretation thereof, shall be delivered to Nitec Pharma following the signing hereof.
 

3.	Transfer of Rights and Know-How
 

3.1.	Merck hereby sells, assigns and promises to otherwise transfer to and Nitec Pharma hereby purchases, accepts assignment and promises to accept delivery and/or transfer of the entire know-how obtained within the framework of the development of the Project to date, including all clinical test and stability patterns, experimental charges and all (also electronic) documents, including the correspondence to date (“Know-How”). Upon conclusion hereof the Know-How becomes the property of Nitec Pharma and shall be transferred promptly to Nitec Pharma after the signature of this Agreement to the extent that such transfer requires action beyond the signature of this Agreement. Insofar as it is set out in documents, on data carriers or represented in another manner (“Represented Know-How”), Merck shall store the Know-How in safe keeping for Nitec Pharma pending delivery thereof to the latter. In addition, Merck shall grant Nitec Pharma access to all of its know-how obtained with respect to the Active Agent.
 

3

3.2.	Nitec Pharma shall assemble the Represented Know-How by 31st December 2004 at the latest at Merck’s premises, submit such know-how for Merck’s approval, and Merck shall thereupon deliver the same to Nitec Pharma promptly.
 

3.3.	If the results of the development work performed hitherto are protected by copyrights or other industrial property rights, said rights are hereby assigned to Nitec Pharma and Nitec Pharma accepts such assignment. In the same manner, and subject to the condition precedent of the conferral of the required approval pursuant to section 13.4 of the Skye/Jagotec DLA, all of the industrial property rights acquired by Merck from Skye Pharma or from Jagotec on the basis of the Skye/Jagotec DLA within the framework of or in connection with the Skye/Jagotec DLA, are hereby assigned to Nitec Pharma and Nitec Pharma accepts such assignment.
 

3.4.	The purchase price for such Know-How, Represented Know-How and the property rights as defined hereinabove shall be […***…]. Payment shall become due upon signature of this Agreement.
 

3.5.	Should an assignment pursuant to section 3.1 and 3.3 hereof be impossible for legal reasons, Nitec Pharma is hereby granted […***…] a worldwide, exclusive, unlimited and unrestricted perpetual license to use these property rights (with the right to sublicense but subject to the following sentence). Said right of use shall not be transferable in connection with marketing and distributing Merchandise in the Option Area, but shall be transformed into a transferable right of use for such purpose as soon as Nitec Pharma becomes entitled to market and distribute or have marketed and distributed Merchandise in the Option Area in accordance with the provisions set forth in sec. 6 hereof.
 

3.6.	Should the results of the development performed hitherto contain inventions or ideas capable of being protected, Nitec Pharma shall be entitled hereupon to apply for relevant protections in its own name and at its own costs – and where required by law, by naming the inventors pursuant to the statutory provisions in force from time to time - in any countries.
 

3.7.	Should it be reasonably necessary or beneficial for the development and production of the Project to allow access to know-how and/or copyrights and/or industrial property rights from outside the development of the Project, whether owned or licensed or otherwise available to Merck or any other company within the Merck Group, Merck hereby grants Nitec Pharma and undertakes to use its best efforts to procure that Nitec Pharma is granted by any other company within the Merck Group a non-exclusive, […***…] license to use such know-how and/or copyrights and/or industrial property rights. The right to transfer such right shall be limited to affiliates of Nitec Pharma within the meaning of § 15 German Stock Corporation Act. Transfers to any other persons shall be limited to the following purposes:
 
 