Collectively, this research suggests that big data offers both new potential discriminatory harms and new potential solutions to discriminatory harms. To maximize the benefits and limit the harms, companies should consider the questions raised by research in this area. These questions include the following: 1. How representative is your data set? Workshop participants and researchers note that the data sets, on which all big data analysis relies, may be missing information about certain populations, e.g., individuals who are more careful about revealing information about themselves, who are less involved in the formal economy, who have unequal access or less fluency in technology resulting in a digital divide148 or data desert,149 or whose behaviors are simply not observed because they are believed to be less profitable constituencies.150 Recent examples demonstrate the impact of missing information about particular populations on data analytics.  For example, Hurricane Sandy generated more than twenty million tweets between October 27 and November 1, 2012.151 If organizations were to use this data to determine where services should be deployed, the people who needed services the most may not have received them. The greatest number of tweets about Hurricane Sandy came from Manhattan, creating the illusion that Manhattan was the hub of the disaster. Very few messages originated from more severely affected locations, such as Breezy Point, Coney Island, and Rockaway—areas with lower levels of smartphone ownership and Twitter usage. As extended power blackouts drained batteries and limited cellular access, even fewer tweets came from the worst hit areas. As one researcher noted, “data are assumed to accurately reflect the social world, but there are significant gaps, with little or no signal coming from particular communities.”152 Organizations have developed ways to overcome this issue. For example, the city of Boston developed an application called Street Bump that utilizes smartphone features such as GPS feeds to collect and report to the city information about road conditions, including potholes. However, after the release of the application, the Street Bump team recognized that because lower income individuals may be less likely to carry smartphones, the data was likely not fully representative of all road conditions. If the city had continued relying on the biased data, it might have skewed road services to higher income neighborhoods. The team addressed this problem by issuing its application to city workers who service the whole city and supplementing the data with that from the public.153 This example demonstrates why it is important to consider the digital divide and other issues of underrepresentation and overrepresentation in data inputs before launching a product or service in order to avoid skewed and potentially unfair ramifications. 2. Does your data model account for biases? While large data sets can give insight into previously intractable challenges, hidden biases at both the collection and analytics stages of big data’s life cycle could lead to disparate impact.154 Researchers have noted that big data analytics “can reproduce existing patterns of discrimination, inherit the prejudice of prior decision-makers, or simply reflect the widespread biases that persist in society.”155 For example, if an employer uses big data analytics to synthesize information gathered on successful existing employees to define a “good employee candidate,” the employer could risk incorporating previous discrimination in employment decisions into new employment decisions.156 Even prior to the widespread use of big data, there is some evidence of the use of data leading to the reproduction of existing biases. For example, one researcher has noted that a hospital developed a computer model to help identify “good medical school applicants” based on performance levels of previous and existing students, but, in doing so, the model reproduced prejudices in prior admission decisions.157 Companies can also design big data algorithms that learn from human behavior; these algorithms may “learn” to generate biased results. For example, one academic found that Reuters and Google queries for names identified by researchers to be associated with African-Americans were more likely to return advertisements for arrest records than for names identified by researchers to be associated with white Americans.158 The academic concluded that determining why this discrimination was occurring was beyyond the scope of her research, but reasoned that search engines’ algorithms may learn to prioritize arrest record ads for searches of names associated with African-Americans if people click on such ads more frequently than other ads.159 This could reinforce the display of such ads and perpetuate the cycle. Companies should therefore think carefully about how the data sets and the algorithms they use have been generated. Indeed, if they identify potential biases in the creation of these data sets or the algorithms, companies should develop strategies to overcome them. As noted above, Google changed its interview and hiring process to ask more behavioral questions and to focus less on academic grades after discovering that replicating its existing definitions of a “good employee” was resulting in a homogeneous tech workforce.160 More broadly, companies are starting to recognize that if their big data algorithms only consider applicants from “top tier” colleges to help them make hiring decisions, they may be incorporating previous biases in college admission decisions.161 As in the examples discussed above, companies should develop ways to use big data to expand the pool of qualified applicants they will consider.162 3. How accurate are your predictions based on big data? Some researchers have also found that big data analysis does not give sufficient attention to traditional applied statistics issues, thus leading to incorrect results and predictions.163 They note that while big data is very good at detecting correlations, it does not explain which correlations are meaningful.164 A prime example that demonstrates the limitations of big data analytics is Google Flu Trends, a machinelearning algorithm for predicting the number of flu cases based on Google search terms. To predict the spread of influenza across the United States, the Google team analyzed the top fifty million search terms for indications that the flu had broken out in particular locations. While, at first, the algorithms appeared to create accurate predictions of where the flu was more prevalent, it generated highly inaccurate estimates over time.165 This could be because the algorithm failed to take into account certain variables. For example, the algorithm may not have taken into account that people would be more likely to search for flu-related terms if the local news ran a story on a flu outbreak, even if the outbreak occurred halfway around the world. As one researcher has noted, Google Flu Trends demonstrates that a “theory-free analysis of mere correlations is inevitably fragile. If you have no idea what is behind a correlation, you have no idea what might cause that correlation to break down.”166 As another example, workshop participants discussed the fact that lenders can improve access to credit by using non-traditional indicators, e.g., rental or utility bill payment history.167 Consumers, however, have the right to withhold rent if their landlord does not provide heat or basic sanitation services. In these instances, simply compiling rental payment history would not necessarily demonstrate whether the person is a good credit risk.168 In some cases, these sources of inaccuracies are unlikely to have significant negative effects on consumers. For example, it may be that big data analytics shows that 30 percent of consumers who buy diapers will respond to an ad for baby formula. That response rate may be enough for a marketer to find it worthwhile to send buyers of diapers an advertisement for baby formula. The 70 percent of consumers who buy diapers but are not interested in formula can disregard the ad or discard it at little cost. Similarly, consumers who are interested in formula and who do not buy diapers are unlikely to be substantially harmed because they did not get the ad. On the other hand, if big data analytics are used as the basis for access to credit, housing, or other similar benefits, the potential effects on consumers from inaccuracies could be substantial.169 For example, suppose big data analytics predict that people who do not participate in social media are 30 percent more likely to be identity thieves, leading a fraud detection tool to flag such people as “risky.” Suppose further that a wireless company uses this tool and requires “risky” people to submit additional documentation before they can obtain a cell phone contract. These people may not be able to obtain the contract if they do not have the required documentation.