C. Channel Coding
 A noticeable feature of the air interface of the 5G is the use
 of new channel coding techniques: Data channels use lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, and control channels use
 polar codes [18]. However, the use of these techniques have
 some limitations. For instance, polar codes can achieve
 excellent performance, but it takes several iterations to
 achieve this performance, and there is no way to predict how
 fast polar codes can reach this desired performance. In
 addition, LDPC codes suffer from high complexity of decoding
 when either it is used with large block or the channel is under
 colored noise.
 Deep learning is well-known for its high parallelism
 structure, which can implement one-shot coding/decoding.
 Thus, many researchers predict that deep learning-based
 channel coding is a propitious method to enable 5G NR. For
 instance, the authors of [19] proposed reinforcement learning
 for effective decoding strategies for binary linear codes such
 as ReedMuller and BCH codes, and as a case study, they
 considered bit-flipping decoding. The authors mapped learned
 bit-flipping decoding to a Markov decision process and
 reformulated the decoding problem using both standards and
 fitted Q-learning with a neural network. The neural network
 architecture consists of two hidden layers with 500 and 1500
 neurons with ReLu activation functions. For the training
 hyperparameters, the authors considered ten iterations and
 0.99 as a discount factor. The SNR is ranging from -2dB to 8dB.
 The authors considered two types of channels, binary
 symmetric channel, and Additive White Gaussian Noise
 (AWGN) channel.
 The authors of [20] proposed three types of deep neural
 networks for channel decoding for 5G, multi-layer perceptron,
 convolutional neural network, and recurrent neural network.
 The authors used polar codes with rate 1/2 and three
 codeword lengths 8, 16, and 32. The signal to noise ratio is
 from -2 dB to 20 dB. The authors showed that the recurrent
 neural network has the best decoding performance but at the
 cost of high computation time.
 The authors of [21] studied a low latency, robust, and
 scalable convolutional neural network-based decoder of
 convolutional and LPDC codes. The convolution decoder is
 trained to decode in a single-shot using Mixed-SNR
 independent sampling. The CNN decoder is tested with
 different block lengths of 100, 200, and 1000 under the AWGN
 channel and with total samples of 109 samples, and SNR is
 ranging from -4dB to 4dB. The proposed model is compared
 with Viterbi, BiGRY, and bit flipping based decoders using bit
 error rate and block error rate. The authors showed that CNN
 outperforms the previously mentioned decoders regarding
 BER and BLER.
 Also, CNN decoder is eight times faster than RNN decoders.
 Another example of deep learning-based channel decoder is
 proposed in [22]. The proposed deep learning models consists
 of an iterative belief propagation concatenated with a
 convolutional neural network (BP-CNN) LDPC decoding under
 correlated noise, CNN for denoising the received signal and BP
 for decoding. The authors considered the AWGN channel and
 BPSK modulation. The authors showed that BPCNN reduces the decoding bit error rate with low complexity.
 Further studies are required to investigate the performance
 of deep learning under communication channels which exhibit
 correlations in fading. Deep learning-based channel coding can
 achieve a good range of performance–complexity trade-offs, if
 the training is performed correctly as the choice of code-word
 length, causes over-fitting and under-fitting.
 

 D. Intelligent Radio Resource and Network Management
 Radio resources are scarce, and there is an increasing
 demand of wireless traffic. Intelligent wireless network
 management is the way forward to meet these increasing
 demands. Machine learning/deep learning can be a promising
 feature for resource allocation in 5G wireless communication
 networks. Deep learning can be a good alternative for
 interference management, spectrum management, multi-path
 usage, link adaptation, multi-channel access, and traffic
 congestion. For instance, the authors of [23] proposed an AI
 scheduler to infer the free slots in a multiple frequencies time
 division multiple access to avoid congestion and high packet
 loss. Four last frames state are fed to a neural network, which
 consists of two fully connected hidden layers. The proposed AI
 scheduler was tested in a wireless sensor network of 5 nodes
 and can reduce the collisions with other networks with 50%.
 The authors of [24] proposed the addition of the artificial
 intelligence module instead of replacing conventional
 scheduling module in LTE systems. This AI module can provide
 conventional scheduling algorithms with the flexibility and
 speed up the convergence time. As scheduling for cooperative
 localization is a critical process to elevate the coverage and the
 localization precision, the authors of [25] presented a deep
 reinforcement learning for decentralized cooperative
 localization scheduling in vehicular networks.
 The authors of [26] proposed a deep reinforcement learning
 (DRL) based on LSTM to enables small base stations to perform
 dynamic spectrum access to an unlicensed spectrum. The
 model enables the dynamic selection of wireless channel,
 carrier aggregation, and fractional spectrum access. The
 coexistence of WLAN and other LTE-LAA operators
 transmitting on the same channel is formulated as a game
 between the two and each of which aims to maximize its rate
 while achieving long-term equal-weighted fairness. This game
 is solved using DRL-LSTM. The proposed framework showed
 significant improvement.
 The authors of [27] proposed an AI framework for smart
 wireless network management based on CNN and RNN to
 extract both the sequential and spatial features from the raw
 signals. These features serve as a state of deep reinforcement
 learning which defines the optimal network policy. The
 proposed framework was tested using real-experiment an
 experiment using a real-time heterogeneous wireless network
 test-bed. The proposed AI framework enhances the average
 throughput by approximately 36%. However, the proposed
 framework is costly in terms of training time and memory
 usage.
 The authors of [28] proposed a deep-reinforcement learning
 approach for SDN routing optimization. To evaluate the
 performance of the proposed DRL based routing model, the
 scalefree network topology of 14 nodes, and 21 full-duplex
 links, with uniform link capacities and average node degree of
 3, and traffic intensity levels from 12.5% to 125% of the total
 network capacity. The trained DRL routing model can achieve
 similar configurations that of methods such as analytical
 optimization or local-search heuristic methods with minimal
 delays. Some other work on routing can be found in [29], [30].
 Another aspect of network management is interference
 management. Interference management often relays on
 algorithms such as WMMSE. This algorithm is costly as it uses
 matrix inversion, to solve the problem of numerical
 optimization in signal processing, the authors of [31] proposed
 to approximate the WMMSE used for interference
 management, which is has a central role in enabling Massive
 MIMO systems. The authors showed that SP optimization
 algorithms could be approximated by a finite-size neural
 network.