Our NIKE Brand product offerings are aligned around our consumer construct focused on Men's, Women's and Kids'. We also design products specifically for the Jordan Brand and Converse. We believe this approach allows us to create products that better meet individual consumer needs while accelerating our largest growth opportunities. 

NIKE's athletic footwear products are designed primarily for specific athletic use, although a large percentage of the products are worn for casual or leisure purposes. We place considerable emphasis on innovation and high-quality construction in the development and manufacturing of our products. Our Men's, Women's and Jordan Brand footwear products currently lead in footwear sales and we expect them to continue to do so.

We also sell sports apparel, which features the same trademarks and are sold predominantly through the same marketing and distribution channels as athletic footwear. Our sports apparel, similar to our athletic footwear products, is designed primarily for
athletic use, although many of the products are worn for casual or leisure purposes, and demonstrates our commitment to innovation and high-quality construction. Our Men's and Women's apparel products currently lead in apparel sales and we expect
them to continue to do so. We often market footwear, apparel and accessories in "collections" of similar use or by category. We also market apparel with licensed college and professional team and league logos. 

We sell a line of performance equipment and accessories under the NIKE Brand name, including bags, socks, sport balls, eyewear, timepieces, digital devices, bats, gloves, protective equipment and other equipment designed for sports activities. We also sell small amounts of various plastic products to other manufacturers through our wholly-owned subsidiary, NIKE IHM, Inc., doing business as Air Manufacturing Innovation. 

Our Jordan Brand designs, distributes and licenses athletic and casual footwear, apparel and accessories predominantly focused on basketball performance and culture using the Jumpman trademark. Sales and operating results for Jordan Brand products are reported within the respective NIKE Brand geographic operating segments. 

Our wholly-owned subsidiary brand, Converse, headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts, designs, distributes and licenses casual sneakers, apparel and accessories under the Converse, Chuck Taylor, All Star, One Star, Star Chevron and Jack Purcell trademarks. Operating results of the Converse brand are reported on a stand-alone basis.

In addition to the products we sell to our wholesale customers and directly to consumers through our NIKE Direct operations, we have also entered into license agreements that permit unaffiliated parties to manufacture and sell, using NIKE-owned trademarks,
certain apparel, digital devices and applications and other equipment designed for sports activities.