Industry Analysis

Overview of the Industry

The Aerospace and Defense industry has seen accelerated growth in the past couple of
years. The rising demand in today’s environment for military equipment has added to this
huge success. The rapid growth rate of nations like China and India has contributed to the
rising demand for passenger aircrafts for travel. The increase in the world’s growth rate
also helps benefit the Boeing Co. The Aerospace industry has recorded annual sales
growth of 8.2% for the five years through 2005, and 10.4% for the past three years. Net
income rose by 12.4% annually over the five year period, and 20.8% annually over the past
three years. For the five year period ending in September of 2006, the S&P 500 Aerospace
and Defense industry index had outperformed the S&P 500 by 71%. The result for the three
year period was the same. The industry returned 87%, while the S&P 500 returned 42%.

The Aerospace industry has been revitalized and has been booming due to a strong wave
of global economic growth and the emergence of countries such as China and India as
economic powers. The rise of wealth in the Middle East has also added to the booming
success. This massive growth throughout the world has spurred huge gains in business
travel, as well as in air cargo traffic. Boeing saw its orders from China jump to 143
commercial jets in 2005, and 114 for the nine months through September 2006. India
ordered 98 planes from Boeing in 2005. Middle East orders also rose to 44 in 2005. Also,
rising income levels, in some countries, have added to the company’s success, due to the
greater mobility amongst people in such regions.

The defense market has experienced massive growth since the terrorist attacks of 2001,
as a result of the U.S. government funding the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. Since the wars
have begun, the U.S. government and the governments of other nations have splurged and
put a lot of money into defense. Safety and national security has become a huge profit
gainer for the Aerospace and Defense industry. Also, it is believed that the United States
and its allies are locked in a struggle for control that will continue in years to come. This will
increase the need for expenditures in the future for military equipment. One issue that has
risen is that while defense is benefiting from the current environment in which we live, air
travel is not, as a result of the attacks in 2001. This could very well decrease commercial
air travel.
Commercial Aircraft

Based on total unit orders of 100-plus seat jetliners in 2005 (latest available), Boeing and
Airbus control about 49% and 51%, respectively, of the global commercial jetliner market.
Demand for jetliners is driven primarily by growth in the global 100-plus seat commercial
aircraft fleet. Independent research firm Avitas Inc., projects that the global fleet of 100-
plus seat jetliners will grow at a 4.3% compound annual rate over the next 20 years, due to
its projection of a 5.9% compound annual growth in passenger traffic over the same period.
We believe that, given the economic development of many former third-world countries in
Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East, etc., fleet growth should continue at an above-
average rate for the foreseeable future.

One of the things that helps Boeing in this segment of their business is their Six Sigma
methodology. Six Sigma aids manufacturers in their quest to design, build and deliver near-
perfect products by reducing defects and variation, and improving quality, resulting in
substantial cost savings. Six Sigma refers to manufacturing processes that produce a level
of quality at 3.4 defects per million opportunities. Most U.S. companies operate at a rate of
66,807 defects per million, or "3.0 Sigma." Boeings’ current main plant location is
in Seattle, Washington. Although Boeing mostly outsourcers many of its business
products and flies them in, they still remain to have a presence in the States.

Military Segment

Examining Boeings’ military weapons segment, demand for IDS's equipment and systems
is primarily driven by growth in the procurement and Research and Development sectors
of the U.S. defense budget, which accounts for about 40% of global military weapons
spending. Based on U.S. Department of Defense statistics, from fiscal year 1995 through
fiscal year 2005, the procurement and Research and Development sectors of the total
U.S. defense budget grew at 8.0% and 5.1% average annual rates, respectively. It is
believed that two factors contributed to this strong growth: cuts to the defense budget that
occurred during the Clinton presidential administration, which resulted in the need for
increased defense spending in later years, and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. We expect
defense budgets to continue to grow, but at much slower rates, going forward. This will be
especially evident as the U.S. decreases its presence in Iraq in the near future.
Outlook on Aerospace and Defense

The fundamental outlook for the Aerospace & Defense industry is positive. We believe
many companies in the Aerospace & Defense area will record solid earnings per share
gains in the near term, due to our nation's current military action, plus the high growth in
nations such as China and India. The outlook for the defense segment is strongly positive.
We believe that the ongoing military actions in Iraq and Afghanistan, potential threats from
Islamic terrorists, North Korea and Iran, as well as a military buildup in China, will make it
necessary to continue funding the defense segment. At the same time, we believe that a
number of defense contractors have become more efficient, have shown strong cash flow,
and have engaged in significant share repurchases and dividend increases. However, there
is also the potential likelihood of the risk of declining defense spending following the recent
Democratic win of Congress.

The outlook for the commercial aircraft segment is especially positive. In looking at the 100-
plus-seat commercial aircraft-making sector, we expect that the global airline industry, the
largest customer of passenger jets, will continue to have strong passenger traffic growth,
which the International Air Transport Associations projects at over 4.5% in 2007. Following
the 9/11 attacks, global airlines were hit by large declines in air traffic. However, passenger
traffic has picked up significantly in recent years, boosted by global economic growth and
attractive fares.

Boeing currently has a higher price-to-earnings ratio than typically desired for a value
investor. However, this high ratio is due to Boeings’ very high growth potential. Boeing
currently receives the most contracts in their industry, whether it is in the commercial aircraft
segment of their business, or the military segment of their business. Furthermore, Boeing
has surpassed its earnings estimates for the most recent quarter (ending March 31, 2007)
by a whopping 27%. Orders are pouring into the company on an almost daily basis. This is
for a hundred million dollar product! The price for a 787 Dreamliner ranges from $138 million
to $188 million per plane.

Customers include: Air New Zealand (787-9, eight), Blue Panorama (four), First Choice
Airways (eight), Continental (20), Japan Airlines (30 + 20 options), Vietnam Airlines (four),
Chinese Airlines (60), Icelandair (four), Ethiopian Airlines (ten), Korean Airlines (ten + ten
options), Northwest Airlines (18 + 50 options), Air Canada (14 + 46 options), Air India
(27), Royal Air Maroc (four), LOT (seven), China Southern (ten), ILFC (20), Qantas (45 +
20 options), Kenya Airways (six), Singapore Airlines (787-9, 20
+ 20 options), Air Pacific (787-9, five + three options), Monarch
Airlines (787-8, six + four options).

 DJ US Aerospace & Defense Index vs. Boeing: 5 Year Trend




                           DJ US
                          Aerospa
                             ce &
                          Defense
                            Index
                              VS
Boeing, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman: 5 Year Trend
