𝐒𝐭𝐨𝐜𝐤𝐬 𝐚𝐧𝐝 𝐁𝐨𝐧𝐝𝐬 𝐂𝐨𝐦𝐩𝐚𝐫𝐢𝐬𝐨𝐧

Large companies and other entities use bonds as
a form of debt borrowing or financing. Unlike loans,
bonds are more transferrable and divisible by the
lenders, allowing for multiple investors, which is
appropriate when financing needs are very substantial.
Bearing similarities to the concept of a first mortgage
and a second mortgage, there are senior bonds
and subordinated bonds; the senior bonds take
precedence over the subordinated bonds in terms of
payment priority, and therefore are safer for the lender
or investor.
Equity, on the other hand, represents a share of
ownership in a for-profit corporation. It is what is “left
over” from revenue brought in after all expenses
(operating expenses, taxes, interest) have been paid.
Because equity holders are entitled to what is “left
over,” this means they are the investor class exposed
to the greatest risk, but are also entitled to the greatest
reward.
A corporation’s capital structure is typically comprised
of one or more forms of debt and one or more forms
of equity. According to the chart below, there is an
order of precedence governing how money flows in
an entity from one class of investors to another.
Because debt or bond holders have a senior claim
relative to equity holders, business profits first go
towards senior debt payments, then to any subordinate
class of debt, and then to any preferred class of equity.
From there, all remaining profits flow to common
equity as a return on investment to be distributed to
the owners of common equity. Pending the direction
and approval of the company’s board of directors, this
distribution can come in the form of a dividend (or
stock buyback), reinvested into the company, or most
likely a combination of both.
If business prospects are extremely good, a common
equity shareholder may receive a theoretically
uncapped return on their investment. Over the long
run, the return on equity of successful and stable
corporations exceeds the cost of debt sufficiently
enough to compensate investors for the additional
risk they are taking. The source of the additional risk
is the priority of payments when business conditions
are weaker.
If there is an economic cycle of weaker revenues,
a business might find itself barely able to service its
debt financing. In this case, it is unlikely any residual
profits will be available to common shareholders for
distribution; these circumstances may last for years
and many require the business to resort to costly
compromises to ensure its debt payments are met.
Meanwhile, the senior debt holders can take comfort
in the fact the return on their investment is of highest
priority and will only be compromised as a last resort.
This creates what can be referred to as a more open
system of outcomes for stocks and a more closed
system of outcomes for bonds; this feature will be
expanded upon in greater detail later.
These nuances in the capital structure may seem like
semantics to some, but as was stated in the introduction,
it is an essential component of developing a true
understanding of investment options and has great
implications on risk and return characteristics.
Stock and Bond Investment
Opportunities
In terms of the number of different investments
investors are able to choose from, there are
overwhelmingly more bond opportunities than stock
opportunities. This may come as a surprise to some
as market media attention is overwhelmingly slanted
towards stock investing instead of bond investing.
Investment products are: • Not a Deposit 
• Not FDIC Insured 
• Not Insured by any Federal Government Agency
• Not Guaranteed by the Bank 
• May Go Down in Value
In fact, there are 68 times more bond issuances than
there are publicly owned stocks. If a person only
includes the stocks actively traded on an exchange,
there would be 277 times more bond issuances. Yet
in terms of the amount of capital invested in each
market, there is only 54% more invested in bonds than
there is invested in equities.
Similar to how the vast amount of market media
attention is fixated on the relatively few amount of
actively traded stocks, the amount of investment
dollars chasing those actively traded stocks is
disproportionately large compared to the amount of
capital invested in the vast universe of bonds.
Within the overemphasis on stocks, there is yet more
of a disproportionate emphasis placed on the largest
companies; of the aggregate investment in all of
the 15,000 publicly traded corporations, 70% of that
capital is concentrated in the 500 largest corporations.
Put another way, 70% of the money is invested in 3% of
the companies; these are the companies receiving the
lion’s share of market media attention!
In investing, when all of the attention and capital is
placed in one area, it is unlikely there are undiscovered
opportunities in that area. In fact, numerous studies
have shown there is no outperformance potential
when investing in the largest U.S. corporations.
However, studies have consistently indicated
outperformance potential is available investing in
small U.S. corporations, various bond sectors, and in
certain international investments.
Different Types of Stocks
Stock market opportunities are often segmented
different ways. The three most prominent forms of
categorization are market capitalization size, value or
growth, and industry classification.
The capitalization size of a company is measured
by the market value of all outstanding shares of a
company’s equity. Companies’ market capitalization
is categorized between large cap, medium cap, and
small cap. Companies are considered to be large
cap when their market capitalization exceeds $10
billion. Companies between $2 billion and $10 billion
market cap are considered mid cap companies. Those
companies with less than $2 billion market cap are
considered small cap companies.
The next series of categorization is between value
and growth and is often determined by the price
of a company’s equity in relation to its earnings, its
future earnings prospects, and the amount of profits
the corporations retain versus what is returned to
shareholders. All else unchanged, the lower the
company’s price relative to earnings (measured by the
Price to Earnings (P/E) ratio, or other relative value
measurements) the more likely it is to be classified
as a value company instead of a growth company;
Investment products are:
• Not a Deposit 
• Not FDIC Insured
• Not Insured by any Federal Government Agency
• Not Guaranteed by the Bank • May Go Down in Value
value companies tend to have a low stock price due
to unfavorable growth or future earnings prospects.
Growth companies tend to have very favorable
earnings growth forecasts causing their equity prices
to be much higher relative to the company’s current
earnings.
When categorizing equity mutual funds or ETFs, the
Equity Style Box is a conventional way to categorize
the predominant types of companies a fund is
primarily invested in. The Equity Style a fund pursues
may not provide an investor the capability to predict
future returns, but it helps to understand the types of
companies a fund is invested in and to compare the
actual investment activities to the fund’s mandated
objectives.
The final categorization of stocks is the industry
classifications; these are subsections of the equity
investment market and are often referred to as
equity subsectors. The predominant subsectors are:
energy, materials, industrials, consumer goods (basic
staples), consumer discretionary, health care, utilities,
financials, and technology. This series of classifications
is especially useful because an industry’s trends,
opportunities, and risks bear a heavy influence on the
future prospects of the earnings and stock price of
companies within that industry.
In fact, a key focal point in corporate investment
analysis is to perform an industry analysis. As an
industry is beneficially or negatively exposed to an
economic cycle, the corresponding beneficial or
negative implications are likely to be shared across
the vast majority of companies in the industry. By
categorizing between equity subsectors, an investor
may be better able to develop informed expectations
of how their equity portfolio will perform in a given
economic cycle.
Different Types of Bonds
Three general categorizations of bonds are issuer type,
maturity length, and credit strength. When discussing
stocks, the discussion always pertained to shares of
corporations. For-profit corporations are only one of
many kinds of bond issuers.
The overarching categorizations of bond issuers are:
U.S. Treasury and other federal agencies, mortgage-
related bonds, corporate bonds, asset-backed bonds,
and municipal bonds. Within mortgage-related, asset-
backed, and municipal bonds, there is a multitude of
meaningfully different issuer types. For example: in
municipal bonds, there are: cities, states, counties, toll
roads, school districts, business and residential real
estate developments, event centers, hospitals, prisons,
sewer systems, tobacco bonds, etc. The type of issuer
and its repayment source carry strong implications
on a bond’s credit strength, its perceived risk, and
ultimately the return opportunities for investors.
The maturity length of a bond and whether it can be
prepaid in advance of the maturity date has important
implications on the long term returns on bond
investing. All else unchanged, a bond with a longer
maturity typically has a higher return and is considered
to be a higher risk.2
Basic Bond Valuation and Maturity Trade-offs
If a person owns a $100 bond that earns 5%
return each year for 5 years in a world where the
market expects 5% return, the market value on
the bond would be $100. However, if the market
instead expected a 4% return, what would the
2However, in the context of a portfolio of stocks and bonds, having longer maturity bonds while having greater individual risk can actually
lower portfolio risk due to their historic negative correlation to stocks.
market value be? In that case, the bond owner
would benefit by an extra 1% per year over
5 years equating to a 5% aggregate benefit;
ignoring compounding and preciseness, the
market value on that bond would be 5% higher,
or $105. For a 10 year bond instead of a 5 year
bond, the differences in interest rates would
have twice the magnitude of impact.
