Dear Stockholders,
This past year has been a transformative one for eBay: We delivered solid results, and in our continued
pursuit to drive long-term sustainable growth, we’ve set an even more ambitious vision — to reinvent
the future of ecommerce for enthusiasts.
We made significant progress against our goals, with improvements in organic FX-Neutral and
as-reported year-over-year GMV growth during each quarter of 2023. For the full year, revenue was
up 3% organically, we generated approximately $2 billion of free cash flow, and we returned over
$1.9 billion to stockholders through repurchases and dividends. Based on these results, we are
confident that our strategy is the right one and that we are on the path to build a stronger, more
resilient company.
Since I rejoined eBay as CEO four years ago, we’ve renewed our focus on offering meaningful choices
and value, and building trust with our global community of sellers and buyers. The pace of innovation
at eBay has accelerated, and we have pivoted to a full-funnel marketing approach aimed at attracting
and retaining enthusiast customers.
In 2023, we raised the bar further to enhance the end-to-end experience for our customers and drive
growth for stockholders by leveraging three key strategic pillars: relevant experiences, scalable
solutions, and magical innovations.
As we navigated a dynamic macroeconomic environment, we set our organization up for speed
and prioritized initiatives that we believe will have an outsized impact on our customers, community,
and stockholders.
Relevant Experiences
We are focused on solving the specific and ever-changing needs of our sellers and buyers across all
shopping occasions. Through our Focus Category playbook, we have seen a meaningful improvement
in our growth relative to the market in every category we’ve invested in to date.
In 2023, Focus Categories grew by 4% year-over-year on an FX-neutral basis, outpacing the
remainder of our business by roughly seven points. We exited the year with Focus Categories making
up nearly 30% of our business, and we will continue to expand to new categories in 2024. Our
investments in Focus Categories led to numerous improvements in the overall customer experience
on eBay last year, including: 
CEO Letter to Stockholders
2023
2
• We launched eBay Guaranteed Fit in the U.S. and similar programs in the UK and Germany to
benefit our Motors Parts & Accessories (P&A) business, assuring buyers that eBay will stand
behind them if a part doesn’t fit their vehicle. These programs are underpinned by multiple years of
investment in P&A technology, have delivered a game-changing level of trust for buyers, and have
yielded measurable uplift in conversion for sellers.
• We launched the Certified by Brand program with over 30 brands offering new and certified preowned inventory, bringing an enhanced level of trust to the watch, jewelry, and handbag categories.
• Our eBay Refurbished program continues to outperform as consumers turn to eBay for
sustainability and value in the current economic environment. eBay Refurbished was one of our
fastest growing Focus Categories in 2023, posting healthy double-digit, FX-Neutral GMV growth
for the full year. Last year, we added dozens of new categories to the program, signed up more
brands and OEMs to sell refurbished inventory directly on eBay, and made onboarding for small
business sellers faster and more scalable to increase the amount of great refurbished inventory
available to buyers.
In addition to Focus Categories, we’re investing in country-specific experiences so that our
marketplace is more attuned to the needs of local sellers and buyers. Last year, we made a significant
investment in Germany, our third largest market as measured by demand, adopting a similar approach
to our vertical playbook:
• We removed some of the biggest hurdles for sellers and introduced a number of features to
address the unique needs of German consumers, including search and SEO enhancements,
shipping and return label improvements, and a complete overhaul of the local pickup experience.
Additionally, we eliminated final value fees for German C2C sellers on domestic transactions to
stimulate our sell-to-buy flywheel in the country.
• Over the past year, C2C seller NPS and customer satisfaction have increased by 20 points or more,
buyers who sell returned to positive growth, unpaid items have been cut in half for local pickups,
and C2C volume in Germany has returned to positive growth.
• Notably, these investments have made our business significantly more resilient to the challenging
macroenvironment in Germany and have resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars of incremental
GMV relative to our prior trajectory. 
CEO Letter to Stockholders
2023
3
Finally, we continued to improve the selling and buying experiences with horizontal enhancements
in 2023:
• We invested further in new capabilities for Search, such as deep learning and visual similarity
to improve ranking and retrieval, reducing queries with low or null results to surface more of our
amazing inventory for customers.
• We began our work in modernizing the buying experience on eBay by rolling out an enhanced
View Item page, which features a streamlined appearance, larger and higher-resolution images,
and an optimized information hierarchy. This update has contributed to a measurable uplift in
GMV versus our previous design, and our work to modernize the overall shopping experience will
continue in 2024.
Scalable Solutions
eBay’s scale is one of our most powerful assets, with over 28 years of data, 132 million buyers, and
nearly 2 billion live listings in 190 markets around the world at the end of 2023. With the foundational
capabilities we developed using AI last year, we will continue to invest in unlocking the power of
our data assets to fuel next-gen ecommerce experiences that we are confident will exceed our
customers’ expectations and set a new standard for the industry.
Our advertising business continued to show strong double-digit growth rates in 2023, driving our
ability to invest meaningfully into the rest of the business. Our advertising platform, which surpassed
900 million live Promoted Listings in 2023, helps sellers achieve greater velocity and price realization
for their inventory.
• We generated over $1.4 billion of total advertising revenue, up roughly 25% on an FX-Neutral basis
for the year and more than double our advertising revenue in 2019.
• Promoted Listings Standard, our cost-per-acquisition product, remains our largest contributor to
advertising revenue due to its simplicity and proven return on ad spend.
• And Promoted Listings Advanced, our cost-per-click format, was among the fastest-growing
products in our advertising portfolio on a year-over-year basis. Over the course of the year, we
significantly enhanced this product with customized keywords and bidding structures, and by
using AI to optimize campaigns.
Also, the payments platform processed approximately $70 billion of volume in 2023 while enabling
transactions between millions of eBay sellers and buyers globally. We continued to scale our
financial services offerings like FX conversion and alternative methods to pay and get paid. We also
meaningfully improved our identity and risk management capabilities that enhance customer value 
CEO Letter to Stockholders
2023
4
and marketplace trust. For instance, investments in the eBay checkout experience and in-house
risk modeling enhancements aimed at reducing transaction friction have measurably improved
conversion on our marketplace and contributed nearly $1 billion in incremental GMV in 2023.
Lastly, our global scale and cross-border capabilities enabled us to launch the eBay International
Shipping (eIS) program, which makes trade more seamless and cost effective for sellers and buyers
worldwide by simplifying the complexities of taxes, duties, and returns.
• We introduced combined shipping for eIS, allowing buyers to order multiple items from an
international seller and pay one consolidated shipping fee.
• We ended 2023 with over 400 million live listings from U.S. sellers shippable to international
buyers, and sellers have had an overwhelmingly positive response to the program, with customer
satisfaction ratings over 40 points higher than the previous global shipping program eIS replaced.