Consumer Guide to Tenant and Landlord Rights
Version 1.1. Last updated June 13, 2022. 11
a claim of housing discrimination based on a protected category.
V. ENDING A LEASE
A periodic lease (month-to-month or year-to-year) most often ends in one of three ways:
• You move out before the end of the term
• You or the landlord gives notice 15 days before the end of the term that the lease will
not renew
• You or the landlord materially breaches the lease
A lease for a fixed period of time most often ends in one of three ways:
• You move out before the end of the term
• The term of the lease expires and the parties do not agree to renew
• You or the landlord materially breaches the lease
A. Early Termination
There is no stand-alone right to terminate a lease early, and many lease agreements do not
allow a tenant to terminate early. If you voluntarily move out before the end of the lease, the
lease does not allow for early termination, and the landlord has not breached any of their
obligations, then you will likely be responsible for paying rent until the lease expires or until the
landlord rents the unit to a new tenant.
In Pennsylvania, the landlord has no obligation to locate a new tenant to rent the unit. If you
move out early, the landlord may be able to make you pay rent for the rest of the lease term.
B. Security Deposit Refund and Deductions
To have your security deposit refunded, you must provide the landlord with a forwarding
address and return the keys to the property. 68 P.S. § 250.512(e). Before leaving, clean the unit
as thoroughly as possible and take photos to document its condition.
Within 30 days after you have moved out, the landlord must either return the entire security
deposit or send you a list of damages, the cost of repairs, and any money remaining from the
security deposit. 68 P.S. § 250.512(a). Permissible deductions include “actual damages” to the
rental unit. Id.
If the landlord does not provide a written list of damages within 30 days, they may not keep any
part of the security deposit. 68 P.S. § 250.512(b). You may then sue to recover double the
amount of the deposit minus any actual damages as determined by a court. 68 P.S. §
250.512(c).
If, within 30 days, the landlord fails to pay you the difference between the security deposit and
the actual damages to the property, the landlord is liable for double the amount by which the
Consumer Guide to Tenant and Landlord Rights
Version 1.1. Last updated June 13, 2022. 12
security deposit exceeds the actual damages to the property. 68 P.S. § 250.512(b)-(c).
If you break the lease, the security deposit may be forfeited. 68 P.S. § 250.512(a).
C. Eviction
A landlord may seek to evict you if you fail to pay rent, fail to move out at the end of the lease,
or violate a term of the lease. 68 P.S. § 250.501(a).
Landlord “self-help” eviction is prohibited – i.e., landlord may not change your locks or shut off
your utility service to initiate an eviction. Instead, the landlord must follow the process below.
Some cities in Pennsylvania, such as Philadelphia, may have eviction diversion or mediation
programs designed to help you and the landlord come to an agreement without using the court
process or creating an eviction record.
1. Notice to Quit
To begin eviction, the landlord must first give you a written eviction notice known as a Notice
to Quit.
• If the eviction is for failure to pay rent or for use of illegal drugs, the Notice to Quit must
give the tenant 10 days to leave voluntarily. 68 P.S. §§ 250.501(b), 250.505-A.
• If the eviction is for a breach of any other condition of the lease and the lease is for one
year or less (or an indeterminate time), the notice to quit must give the tenant 15 days
to leave voluntarily. 68 P.S. § 250.501(b).
• If the eviction is for a breach any other condition of the lease and the lease is for more
than one year, the notice to quit must give the tenant 30 days to leave voluntarily. 68
P.S. § 250.501(b).
The landlord must notify you of the notice to quit in one of three ways, 68 P.S. § 250.501(f):
• Give you the notice personally
• Leave the notice at the main building of the leased property
• Post the notice conspicuously on the leased property
Notice requirements may be and are often waived in the lease under a Waiver of Notice to
Quit provision. If the notice is validly waived, the landlord is permitted to take you to court (see
Landlord Tenant Complaint (Part V.C.2) below), without any advance notice. 68 P.S.
§ 250.501(e).
The Office of Attorney General encourages all landlords across the Commonwealth to deal fairly
with tenants by not including Waiver of Notice to Quit provisions in lease agreements and by
providing tenants with notice before beginning eviction proceedings.
Consumer Guide to Tenant and Landlord Rights
Version 1.1. Last updated June 13, 2022. 13
2. Landlord-Tenant Complaint
If you do not voluntarily leave the unit within the time period listed in the notice to quit, the
landlord still cannot evict you themselves. Instead, the landlord must file a legal action in court
often referred to as a Landlord-Tenant Complaint.
The complaint will be filed with your county’s Magisterial District Court, or in Philadelphia, the
Philadelphia Municipal Court, or in Allegheny County, the Housing Court. The complaint will
ask for possession of the unit and may also ask for back rent or damages. 246 Pa. Code § 503.
After the complaint is filed, the court will issue a summons to you, which is a copy of the
complaint and a notice to appear at a hearing on a specific date and time. 246 Pa. Code § 504.
The court will serve the summons by mailing a copy to you at your last known address by First-
Class Mail. 246 Pa. Code § 506. A sheriff or certified constable will also serve you with the
summons personally or by posting it conspicuously on the leased property. Id.
If you have any claims against the landlord for breach of the lease—for example, a breach of
the Implied Warranty of Habitability (Part IV.C)—you may file a counterclaim, but you must do
so before the date of the hearing. 246 Pa. Code § 508.
Each court will have slightly different rules for how it processes landlord-tenant complaints.
Make sure to check the local rules (sometimes called local civil rules or rules and procedures)
for the court where the complaint was filed to make sure you are aware of how the court
operates. For example, the Philadelphia Municipal Court will continue (i.e., postpone) the
hearing on a landlord-tenant complaint if the tenant has filed a complaint which has been
accepted by the Philadelphia Fair Housing Commission prior to the date the landlord filed the
complaint for eviction.
3. Hearing & Judgment
At the hearing, you and the landlord will each have an opportunity to present your case. 246
Pa. Code § 512. You may bring a lawyer to help you. You may also bring documents, photos,
emails, records, and other evidence to support your case.
It is extremely important that you do not miss your hearing date. If you miss or are late to
your hearing date, the landlord wins by default. If you cannot attend the hearing, contact the
court and ask if the hearing can be rescheduled.
At the end of the hearing or within three days, the judge will make a decision, called a Notice of
Judgment. 246 Pa. Code § 514(C).
• Judgment in favor of the landlord: If the judge rules in favor of the landlord, then the
Consumer Guide to Tenant and Landlord Rights
Version 1.1. Last updated June 13, 2022. 14
landlord will be granted possession of the unit. 246 Pa. Code § 514. The judge may also
require you to pay damages and unpaid rent. Id.
• Judgment in favor of the tenant: If the judge rules in your favor, then the landlord must
do what the judge orders them to do, such as allowing you to remain in the unit or
paying you money.
4. Appeal
You have 10 days after entry of judgement against you to file an appeal in the court of
common pleas. 68 P.S. § 250.513; 246 Pa. Code § 1008. The appeal will block an actual eviction
(in legal terminology, operate as a supersedeas) only if you deposit with the court either three
months’ rent or the amount the judge ordered you to pay, whichever is less. 246 Pa. Code
§ 1008(B). If you are low-income, you can file a tenant’s affidavit and deposit one third of your
monthly rent. 246 Pa. Code § 1008(C). In both situations, you will also have to deposit rent each
month while the appeal is pending. 246 Pa. Code § 1008(B), (C). The money will be held in
escrow by the court.
5. Order of Possession
Even if judgment is entered in favor of the landlord, the landlord still cannot evict you
themselves. Instead, the landlord must wait 10 days after entry of judgment and then ask the
court to issue an order of possession. 246 Pa. Code § 515(B).
The court will serve the order of possession by mailing a copy to you at your last known address
by First-Class Mail. 246 Pa. Code § 517. A sheriff or certified constable will also serve you with
the order of possession personally or by posting it conspicuously on the leased property. Id. The
order of possession will require you to vacate the residential unit within 10 days after the date
of service. 246 Pa. Code § 517(2).
If you remain in the rental unit on the 11th day following service of the order of possession,
then you can be forcibly evicted. 246 Pa. Code § 519(B).
If you are forcibly evicted and leave possessions behind, the landlord must notify you by First-
Class Mail of your right to retrieve the property. 68 P.S. § 250.505a(d), (e). You have 10 days
from the postmark date of the notice to either retrieve your possessions or ask that your
landlord store your possessions for up to 30 days. Id. If you ask your landlord to store your
possessions, you will be responsible for any costs. Id. If you do not contact the landlord or
retrieve your property, the landlord can dispose of it.
Consumer Guide to Tenant and Landlord Rights
Version 1.1. Last updated June 13, 2022. 15
6. Domestic Violence Survivor
If you are a victim of domestic violence,13 then you have 30 days to appeal a judgment in favor
of the landlord. 68 P.S. § 250.513(b). If the landlord obtains an order of possession before the
30 days have passed, you can file a domestic violence affidavit with the court to stay (i.e.,
freeze) the order of possession pending an appeal or until the end of the 30 days. 246 Pa. Code
§ 514.1.
7. Satisfaction of Judgment for Nonpayment of Rent
If the eviction is only for failure to pay rent, a tenant can stop the eviction by paying—any point
before actual eviction—the full amount of unpaid rent and other fees. 246 Pa. Code § 518.
Once that happens, one more step needs to be taken: the landlord should enter with the court
that the judgment has been satisfied. 246 Pa. Code § 341. If your landlord does not do so, you
should file a written request to have the judgment marked satisfied with the court and serve it
on the landlord. 246 Pa. Code § 341.
If the landlord does not enter that the judgment has been satisfied within 90 days of a written
request without good cause, the landlord will be liable to the tenant for 1% of the judgment
amount, at least $250 and up to $2,500, every month the judgment is not marked satisfied. 42
Pa. Cons. Stat. § 8104(b).
8. Eviction Records
An “eviction record” is an official record—court filings, transcripts and orders, for example—
that contains information about a past or ongoing lawsuit to evict a tenant.
There is no uniform requirement across all Pennsylvania courts for what details must be
included in an eviction record; there is no guarantee that the information contained in eviction
records tells the whole story.
An eviction record may also show, incorrectly, that a tenant who was evicted for failure to pay
rent has not satisfied the judgment just because the landlord has failed to have the judgment
marked satisfied with the court.
Pennsylvania does not automatically seal or expunge eviction records, even if the case is
withdrawn.
Some cities in Pennsylvania, such as Philadelphia, may have eviction diversion or mediation
programs designed to help you and the landlord come to an agreement without using the court
process or creating an eviction record.