Context:
tall bushes to promote branching and the production of new leaves, as well as to facilitate
plucking them. Various processing methods are used to attain different levels of oxidation
and produce certain kinds of tea, such as black, white, oolong, green, and pu’erh. Basic
processing includes plucking, withering (to wilt and soften the leaves), rolling (to shape
the leaves and slow drying), oxidizing, and drying. However, depending on the tea type,
some steps are repeated or omitted. For example, green tea is made by withering and
rolling leaves at a low heat, and oxidation is skipped; for oolong, rolling and oxidizing are
performed repeatedly; and for black, extensive oxidation (fermentation) is employed.
3.5.1 The Discovery of Tea
Tea was discovered in 2700 BCE by the ancient Chinese emperor Shen Nung, who had
a keen interest in herbal medicine and introduced the practice of drinking boiled water
to prevent stomach ailments. According to legend, once, when the emperor camped in a
forest during one of his excursions, his servants set up a pot of boiling water under a tree.
A fragrance attracted his attention, and he found that a few dry leaves from the tree had
Colonial Agriculture | 53
fallen accidentally into the boiling pot and changed the color of the water; this was the
source of the aroma. He took a few sips of that water and noticed its stimulative effect
instantly. The emperor experimented with the leaves of that tree, now called Camellia
sinensis, and thus the drink “cha” came into existence. Initially, it was used as a tonic, but
it became a popular beverage around 350 BCE. The historian Lu Yu of the Tang dynasty
(618–907 CE) has written a poetry book on tea called Cha jing (The Classic of Tea) that
contains a detailed description of how to cultivate, process, and brew tea.
Tea spread to Japan and Korea in the seventh century thanks to Buddhist monks, and
drinking it became an essential cultural ritual. Formal tea ceremonies soon began.
However, tea reached other countries only after the sixteenth century. In 1557, the
Portuguese established their first trading center in Macau, and the Dutch soon followed
suit. In 1610, some Dutch traders in Macau took tea back to the Dutch royal family as a
gift. The royal family took an immediate liking to it. When the Dutch princess Catherine of
Braganza married King Charles II of England around 1650, she introduced tea to England.
Tea passed from the royal family to the nobles, but for an extended period, it remained
unknown and unaffordable to common folks in Europe. The supply of tea in Europe was
scant and very costly: one pound of tea was equal to nine months’ wages for a British
laborer.
As European trade with China increased, more tea reached Europe, and consumption of
tea increased proportionally. For example, in 1680, Britain imported a hundred pounds of
tea; however, in 1700, it brought in a million. The British government allowed the British
East India Company to monopolize the trade, and by 1785, the company was buying 15
million pounds of tea from China annually and selling it worldwide. Eventually, in the early
eighteenth century, tea reached the homes of British commoners.
3.5.2 Tea and the “Opium War”
China was self-sufficient; its people wanted nothing from Europe in exchange for tea. But
in Europe, the demand for tea increased rapidly in the mid-eighteenth century. Large
quantities were being purchased, and Europeans had to pay in silver and gold. The East
India Company was buying so much of it that it caused a crisis for the mercantilist British
economy. The company came up with a plan to buy tea in exchange for opium instead of
gold and silver. Although opium was banned within China, it was in demand and sold at
very high prices on the black market.
After the Battle of Plassey in 1757, several northern provinces in India came under the
control of the East India Company, and the company began cultivating poppy in Bengal,
Bihar, Orissa, and eastern Uttar Pradesh. Such cultivation was compulsory, and the
54 | Colonial Agriculture
company also banned farmers from growing grain and built opium factories in Patna
and Banaras. The opium was then transported to Calcutta for auction before British ships
carried it to the Chinese border. The East India Company also helped set up an extensive
network of opium smugglers in China, who then transported opium domestically and sold
it on the black market.
After the successful establishment of this smuggling network, British ships bought tea on
credit at the port of Canton (now Guangzhou), China, and later paid for it with opium in
Calcutta (now Kolkata). The company not only acquired the tea that was so in demand but
also started making huge profits from selling opium. This mixed business of opium and
tea began to strengthen the British economy and made it easier for the British to become
front-runners among the European powers.
By the 1830s, British traders were selling 1,400 tons of opium to China every year, and as a
result, a large number of Chinese became opium addicts. The Chinese government began
a crackdown on smugglers and further tightened the laws related to opium, and in 1838,
it imposed death sentences on opium smugglers. Furthermore, despite immense pressure
from the East India Company to allow the open trading of opium, the Chinese emperor
would not capitulate. However, that did not curb his subjects’ addiction and the growing
demand for opium.
In 1839, by order of the Chinese emperor, a British ship was detained in the port of Canton,
and the opium therein was destroyed. The British government asked the Chinese emperor
to apologize and demanded compensation; he refused. British retaliated by attacking a
number of Chinese ports and coastal cities. China could not compete with Britain’s state-of-
the-art weapons, and defeated, China accepted the terms of the Treaty of Nanjing in 1842
and the Treaty of Bog in 1843, which opened the ports of Canton, Fujian, and Shanghai,
among others, to British merchants and other Europeans. In 1856, another small war broke
out between China and Britain, which ended with a treaty that made the sale of opium
legal and allowed Christian missionaries to operate in China. But the tension between
China and Europe remained. In 1859, the British and French seized Beijing and burned
the royal Summer Palace. The subsequent Beijing Convention of 1860 ended China’s
sovereignty, and the British gained a monopoly on the tea trade.
3.5.3 The Co-option of Tea and the Establishment of
Plantations in European Colonies
Unlike the British, the Dutch, Portuguese, and French had less success in the tea trade.
To overcome British domination, the Portuguese planned to develop tea gardens outside
China. Camellia is native to China, and it was not found in any other country. There was
Colonial Agriculture | 55
a law against taking these plants out of the country, and the method for processing tea
was also a trade secret. In the mid-eighteenth century, many Europeans smuggled the
seeds and plants from China, but they were unable to grow them. Then, in 1750, the
Portuguese smuggled the Camellia plants and some trained specialists out of China and
succeeded in establishing tea gardens in the mountainous regions of the Azores Islands,
which have a climate favorable for tea cultivation. With the help of Chinese laborers and
experts, black and green tea were successfully produced in the Portuguese tea plantations.
Soon, Portugal and its colonies no longer needed to import tea at all. As the owners of the
first tea plantations outside China, the Portuguese remained vigilant in protecting their
monopoly. It was some time before other European powers gained the ability to grow and
process tea themselves.
In the early nineteenth century, the British began exploring the idea of planting tea
saplings in India. In 1824, Robert Bruce, an officer of the British East India Company, came
across a variety of tea popular among the Singpho clan of Assam, India. He used this variety
to develop the first tea garden in the Chauba area of Assam, and in 1840, the Assam Tea
Company began production. This success was instrumental to the establishment of tea
estates throughout India and in other British colonies.
In 1848, the East India Company hired Robert Fortune, a plant hunter, to smuggle tea
saplings and information about tea processing from China. Fortune was the
superintendent of the hothouse department of the British Horticultural Society in
Cheswick, London. He had visited China three times before this assignment; the first, in
1843, had been sponsored by the horticultural society, which was interested in acquiring
important botanical treasures from China by exploiting the opportunity offered by the
1842 Treaty of Nanking after the First Opium War. Fortune managed to visit the interior of
China (where foreigners were forbidden) and also gathered valuable information about the
cultivation of important plants, successfully smuggling over 120 plant species into Britain.
In the autumn of 1848, Fortune entered China and traveled for nearly three years while
carefully collecting information related to tea cultivation and processing. He noted that
black and green teas were made from the leaves of the same plant, Camellia sinensis,
except that the former was “fermented” for a longer period. Eventually, Fortune succeeded
in smuggling 20,000 saplings of Camellia sinensis to Calcutta, India, in Wardian cases.4
4. The Wardian case, a precursor to the modern terrarium, was a special type of sealed glass box made
by British doctor Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward in 1829. The delicate plants within them could thrive for
months. Plant hunter Joseph Hooker successfully used Wardian cases to bring some plants from the
Antarctic to England. In 1933, Nathaniel Ward also succeeded in sending hundreds of small
ornamental plants from England to Australia in these boxes. After two years, another voyage carried
56 | Colonial Agriculture
He also brought trained artisans from China to India. These plants and artisans were
transported from Calcutta to Darjeeling, Assam. At Darjeeling, a nursery was set up for the
propagation of tea saplings at a large scale, supplying plantlets to all the tea gardens in
India, Sri Lanka, and other British colonies.
The British forced the poor tribal population of the Assam, Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa
provinces out of their land, and they were sent to work in tea estates. Tamils from the
southern province of India were also sent to work in the tea plantation of Sri Lanka. Tea
plantations were modeled on the sugar colonies of the Caribbean, and thus the plight of
the workers was in some ways similar to that of the slaves from Caribbean plantations.
Samuel Davidson’s Sirocco tea dryer, the first tea-processing machine, was introduced in Sri
Lanka in 1877, followed by John Walker’s tea-rolling machine in 1880. These machines were
soon adopted by tea estates in India and other British colonies as well. As a result, British
tea production increased greatly. By 1888, India became the number-one exporter of tea to
Britain, sending the country 86 million pounds of tea.
After India, Sri Lanka became prime ground for tea plantations. In the last decades of the
nineteenth century, an outbreak of the fungal pathogen Hemilia vastatrix, a causal agent
of rust, resulted in the destruction of the coffee plantations in Sri Lanka. The British owners
of those estates quickly opted to plant tea instead, and a decade later, tea plantations
covered nearly 400,000 acres of land in Sri Lanka. By 1927, Sri Lanka alone produced 100,000
tons per year. All this tea was for export. Within the British Empire, fermented black tea was
produced, for which Assam, Ceylon, and Darjeeling tea are still famous. Black tea produced
in India and Sri Lanka was considered of lesser quality than Chinese tea, but it was very
cheap and easily became popular in Asian and African countries. In addition to India and
Ceylon, British planters introduced tea plantations to fifty other countries.
3.6 The Story of Coffee
Coffee is made from the roasted seeds of the coffee plant, a shrub belonging to the
Rubiaceae family of flowering plants. There are over 120 species in the genus Coffea, and
all are of tropical African origin. Only Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora are used for
making coffee. Coffea arabica (figure 3.10) is preferred for its sweeter taste and is the
source of 60–80 percent of the world’s coffee. It is an allotetraploid species that resulted
from hybridization between the diploids Coffea canephora and Coffea eugenioides. In the

Colonial Agriculture | 57

wild, coffee plants grow between thirty and forty feet tall and produce berries throughout
the year. A coffee berry usually contains two seeds (a.k.a. beans). Coffee berries are
nonclimacteric fruits, which ripen slowly on the plant itself (and unlike apples, bananas,
mangoes, etc., their ripening cannot be induced after harvest by ethylene). Thus ripe
berries, known as “cherries,” are picked every other week as they naturally ripen. To facilitate
the manual picking of cherries, plants are pruned to a height of three to four feet. Pruning
coffee plants is also essential to maximizing coffee production to maintain the correct
balance of leaf to fruit, prevent overbearing, stimulate root growth, and effectively deter
pests.
Coffee is also a stimulative, and the secret of this elixir is the caffeine present in high
quantities in its fruits and seeds. In its normal state, when our bodies are exhausted, there is
an increase in adenosine molecules. The adenosine molecules bind to adenosine receptors
in our brains, resulting in the transduction of sleep signals. The structure of caffeine is
similar to that of adenosine, so when it reaches a weary brain, caffeine can also bind to
the adenosine receptor and block adenosine molecules from accessing it, thus disrupting
sleep signals.
58 | Colonial Agriculture
3.6.1 The History of Coffee
Coffea arabica is native to Ethiopia. The people of Ethiopia first recognized the stimulative
properties of coffee in the ninth century. According to legend, one day, a shepherd named
Kaldi, who hailed from a small village in the highlands of Ethiopia, saw his goats dancing
energetically after eating berries from a wild bush. Out of curiosity, he ate a few berries and
felt refreshed. Kaldi took some berries back to the village to share, and the people there
enjoyed them too. Hence the local custom of eating raw coffee berries began. There are
records that coffee berries were often found in the pockets of slaves brought to the port of
Mokha from the highlands of Ethiopia. Later, the people of Ethiopia started mixing ground
berries with butter and herbs to make balls.
The coffee we drink today was first brewed in Yemen in the thirteenth century. It became
popular among Yemen’s clerics and Sufis, who routinely held religious and philosophical
discussions late into the night; coffee rescued them from sleep and exhaustion. Gradually,
coffee became popular, and coffeehouses opened up all over Arabia, where travelers, artists,
poets, and common folks visited and had a chance to gossip and debate on a variety of
topics, including politics. Often, governments shut down coffeehouses for fear of political
unrest and revolution. Between the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, coffeehouses
were banned several times in many Arab countries, including Turkey, Mecca, and Egypt. But
coffeehouses always opened again, and coffee became ingrained in Arab culture.
Arabs developed many methods of processing coffee beans. Usually, these methods
included drying coffee cherries to separate the beans. Dried coffee beans can be stored
for many years. Larger and heavier beans are considered better. The taste and aroma
develop during roasting, which determines the quality and price of the coffee. Dried coffee
beans are dark green, but roasting them at a controlled temperature causes a slow
transformation. First, they turn yellow, then light brown, while also popping up and
doubling in size. After continued roasting, all the water inside them dries up, and the beans
turn black like charcoal. The starch inside the beans first turns into sugar, and then sugar
turns into caramel, at which point many aromatic compounds come out of the cells of the
beans. Roasting coffee beans is an art, and a skilled roaster is a very important part of the
coffee trade.
3.6.2 The Spread of Coffee out of Arabia
Coffee was introduced to Europeans in the seventeenth century, when trade between
the Ottoman Empire and Europe increased. In 1669, Turkish ambassador Suleiman Agha
(Müteferrika Süleyman Ağa) arrived in the court of Louis XIV with many valuable gifts,
Colonial Agriculture | 59
including coffee. The French subsequently became obsessed with the sophisticated
etiquettes of the Ottoman Empire. In the company of Aga, the royal court and other elites
of Parisian society indulged in drinking coffee. Aga held extravagant coffee ceremonies
at his residence in Paris, where waiters dressed in Ottoman costumes served coffee to
Parisian society women. Suleiman’s visit piqued French elites’ interest in Turquerie and
Orientalism, which became fashionable. In the history of France, 1669 is thought of as the
year of “Turkmenia.”
A decade later, coffee reached Vienna, when Turkey was defeated in the Battle of 1683. After
the victory, the Viennese seized the goods left behind by the Turkish soldiers, including
several thousand sacks of coffee beans. The soldiers of Vienna didn’t know what it was and
simply discarded it, but one man, Kolshitsky, snatched it up. Kolshitsky knew how to make
coffee, and he opened the first coffeehouse in Vienna with the spoils.
By the end of the seventeenth century, coffeehouses had become common in all the main
cities of Europe. In London alone, by 1715, there were more than 2,000 coffeehouses. As in
Arabia, the coffeehouses of Europe also became the bases of sociopolitical debates and
were known as “penny universities.”
3.6.3 Coffee Plantations
By the fifteenth century, demand for coffee had increased so much that the harvest of
berries from the wild was not enough, and thus in Yemen, people began to plant coffee.
Following Yemen’s lead, other Arab countries also started coffee plantations. Until the
seventeenth century, coffee was cultivated only within North African and Arab countries.
Arabs were very protective of their monopoly on the coffee trade. The cultivation of coffee
and the processing of seeds was a mystery to the world outside of Arabia. Foreigners were
not allowed to visit coffee farms, and only roasted coffee beans (incapable of producing new
plants) were exported. Around 1600, Baba Budan, a Sufi who was on the Haj pilgrimage,
successfully smuggled seven coffee seeds into India and started a small coffee nursery
in Mysore. The early coffee plantations of South India used propagations of plants from
Budan’s garden.
In 1616, a Dutch spy also succeeded in stealing coffee beans from Arabia, and these were
used by the Dutch East India Company as starters for coffee plantations in Java, Sumatra,
Bali, Sri Lanka, Timur, and Suriname (Dutch Guiana). In 1706, a coffee plant from Java was
brought to the botanic gardens of Amsterdam, and from there, its offspring reached Jardin
de plantes in Paris. A clone of the Parisian plant was sent to the French colony Martinique,
and then its offspring spread to the French colonies in the Caribbean, South America, and
Africa. In 1728, a Portuguese officer from Dutch Guiana brought coffee seeds to Brazil,
60 | Colonial Agriculture
which served as starters for the coffee plantations there. The Portuguese also introduced
coffee to African countries and Indonesia, and the British established plantations in their
Caribbean colonies, India, and Sri Lanka from Dutch stock.
In summary, all European coffee plants came from the same Arabian mother plant. So
the biodiversity within their coffee plantations was almost zero, which had devastating
consequences. In the last decades of the nineteenth century, the fungal pathogen
Haemilia vestatrix severely infected coffee plantations in Sri Lanka, India, Java, Sumatra,
and Malaysia. As a result, rust disease destroyed the coffee plantations one by one. Later, in
some of the coffee plantations, Coffea canephora (syn. Coffea robusta), which has a natural
resistance to rust, was planted, but others were converted into tea plantations (as in the
case of Sri Lanka, discussed earlier).
European coffee plantations used the same model as tea or sugar plantations, and so
their workers lived under the same conditions. European powers forcefully employed the
poor native population in these plantations and used indentured laborers as needed. For
example, in Sri Lanka, the Sinhalese population refused to work in the coffee farms, so
British planters recruited 100,000 indentured Tamil workers from India to work the farms
and tea plantations there.
3.7 The Heritage of Plantations
In the twentieth century, most former European colonies became independent countries.
In these countries, private, cooperative, or semigovernmental institutions manage
plantations of sugarcane, tea, coffee, or other commercial crops. Though these plantations
remain a significant source of revenue and contribute significantly to the national GDP of
many countries, their workers still often operate under abject conditions.
References
Johannessen, C. L., & Sorenson, J. L. (2009). World trade and biological exchanges before
1492. iUniverse. (↵ Return)