The Interference Broadcast Channel with
 Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces:
 A Cooperative Sum-Rate Maximization Approach
 

 Abstract—This paper studies the interference broadcast channel comprising multiple multi-antenna Base Stations (BSs), each
 controlling a beyond diagonal Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface
 (RIS) and serving multiple single-antenna users. Wideband
 transmissions are considered with the objective to jointly design
 the BS linear precoding vectors and the phase configurations
 at the RISs in a distributed manner. We take into account
 the frequency selectivity behavior of each RIS’s tunable metaelement, and focusing on the sum rate as the system’s performance criterion, we present a distributed optimization approach
 that enables cooperation between the RIS control units and their
 respective BSs. According to the proposed scheme, each design
 variable can be efficiently obtained in an iterative parallel way
 with guaranteed convergence properties. Our simulation results
 demonstrate the validity of the presented distributed algorithm
 and showcase its superiority over a non-cooperative scheme as
 well as over the special case where the RISs have a conventional
 diagonal structure.
 

 IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
 In our simulations, all nodes were considered positioned on
 a 3D Cartesian coordinate system. In particular, we have set
 Q = 4 and located the BSs in a square of width w = 60 m
 placing BS1 at the origin and the others at the remaining
 corners, letting zBSq = 5 m ∀q= 1, 2, . . . , Q. For simplicity, we
 considered Lq = 1 ∀q = 1, 2, . . . , Q, and the UEs were located
 at the corners of a square, with origin at (30, 60) and width
 equal to 2.5 m, letting also zUE = 1.5 m. Each RIS was placed
 close to the corresponding BS with zRIS = 3 m: RIS1 was
 fixed at (-2.5, 8.5), RIS2 at (62.5, 8.5), RIS3 at (-2.5, 111.5),
 and RIS4 at (62.5, 111.5). All wireless wideband channels
 were modeled as described in [13] with 16 delay taps. For
 the fading component, we have considered distance-dependent
 pathloss between any two nodes i, j with distance di,j (where
 i, j ∈ {BS, UE, RIS}): PLi,j = PL0(di,j/d0)
 -αi,j with
 PL0 = ( λc
 4π
 )
 2 denoting the signal attenuation at the reference
 distance d0 = 1 m and λc represents the carrier wavelength,
 with fc = 3.5 GHz. For the pathloss exponents, we have
 set αBS,UE = 3.7, αBS,RIS = 2.2, and αRIS,UE = 2.6. Equal
 transmit powers and noise variances was considered for all
 users: Pq = P and σ
 2
 ℓq,k = -90 dBm (∀k, ℓ, q), as well
 as bandwidth BW = 0.1 GHz and the number K of SCs
 was set to 64. For the algorithmic parameters, we have set
 τ = 0.80 and a time-varying step size (as detailed in [10]).
 The RIS circuit elements were set as in [9]. For comparison
 purposes, we have also included the achievable rates for the
 following schemes: i) “w/o RISs” with no RISs deployed; and
 ii) “RISs” for Sq =IM. We have also simulated the equivalent
 non-cooperative schemes for which “Π = 0”. We have used
 100 independent Monte Carlo realizations for all performance
 evaluation results that follow.
 In Fig. 1, we examine the performance of the proposed
 design as a function of each BS’s transmit power P for the
 various simulated cases. Evidently, all curves follow a nondecreasing trend as P gets larger. It is also demonstrated that
 the achievable sum rate for the “BD-RISs” case outperforms
 the cases with diagonal RISs and that of “w/o RISs,” especially
 when P ≥ 25 dBm. This implies that the distributed schemes
 outperform the corresponding non-cooperative ones, indicating that adequately optimized cooperative transmit/reflective
 beamforming yields improved gains.
 

 V. CONCLUSION
 In this paper, we studied the RIS-empowered interference
 broadcast channel and presented a cooperative approach for the
 achievable sum-rate maximization with wideband transmissions. Our numerical investigation showcased the additional
 degrees of freedom offered by the proposed optimized BD
 RISs in the high transmit power regime, as well as the gains
 offered by the cooperation among the multiple BSs.
 

 II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
 A. System Model
 We consider a multi-RIS-empowered interference broadcast
 channel comprising Q multi-antenna BSs, each wishing to
 communicate in the downlink direction with multiple singleantenna User Equipments (UEs). We assume that each Nantenna BS sends information to its exclusively associated
 UEs using OFDM in a common set of physical resources, e.g.,
 time and bandwidth. Thus, each BS-UE communicating pair
 is modeled as the superposition of a direct BS-UE link and a
 BS-RIS-UE link realized via the RIS-enabled tunable reflection. Each RIS, comprising M passive reflecting elements, is
 assumed to be controlled by its solely owned BS and is placed
 either closely to it or near to the corresponding set of UEs [3].
 According to the deployed OFDM scheme, the total bandwidth is equally split into K orthogonal Sub-Carriers (SCs). Let wℓq,k ∈ C
 N×1
 , with k = 1, 2, . . . , K represent the
 linear precoding vector at each q-th BS that models the
 digital spatial processing of its unit-power signal sℓq,k (i.e.,
 E{|sℓq,k|
 2} = 1) before transmission. We assume that the
 total transmit power available at each q-th BS is given by
 Pq. Letting Lq denote the number of assigned UEs to the q-th
 BS, the corresponding transmit signal xq,k can be compactly
 expressed as: xq,k =
 PLq
 ℓ=1 wℓq,ksℓq,k. Thus, the condition
 PLq
 ℓ=1
 PK
 k=1∥wℓq,k∥
 2 ≤ Pq must be satisfied. We also consider a quasi-static block fading channel model for all channels
 involved and focus on each particular fading block where the
 channels remain approximately constant with perfect Channel
 State Information (CSI) knowledge.
 B. BD RIS Structure and Element Response
 We consider a BD RIS structure [8], according to which
 an M × M array of ON/OFF-state switches is deployed to
 interconnect all RIS elements. Specifically, an ON-state at the
 switch in the position (i, j) (i, j = 1, 2, . . . , M) of the switch
 array indicates that the signal impinging on the i-th metamaterial element will be guided to and tunably reflected by the j-th
 element. This behavior can be mathematically expressed by a
 selection matrix Sq ∈ {0, 1}M×M (q = 1, 2, . . . , Q), whose
 role is to indicate the switch array selection process at each
 q-th RIS. In particular, each Sq is a binary-valued selection
 matrix (i.e., [Sq]i,j ∈ {0, 1}) which by definition needs to
 satisfy the property of having only one non-zero value per
 row and column simultaneously and, thus, constitutes an extra
 design parameter. Clearly, a typical diagonal RIS, which does
 not require switches [2], is obtained by setting Sq = IM.