Aim of Work  Nanomaterials (nanocrystalline materials) are substances possessing grain sizes on the order of a billionth of a meter. They manifest extraordinarily charming and beneficial properties, which can be exploited for a ramification of structural and nonstructural packages. Seeing that Nanomaterials own unique, beneficial chemical, bodily, and mechanical houses, they may be use for an extensive form of programs, like next era laptop chips, kinetic power (KE) penetrators with more advantageous lethality, better insulation materials, Phosphors for excessive-Defination TV, Low cost Flat-Panel displays, more and more difficult cutting tools, elimination of pollution, excessive strength density, Batteries, excessive power magnets, high sensitive sensors, motors with greater gas efficiency, Aerospace addititives with superior performance characteristics, higher and density weapons platforms, Longer-Lasting Satellites. Longer-Lasting medical implants, Ductile, Machinable ceramics, huge electro chromic show devices. Nanotechnology has the potential to be the key to a brand new world in the field of construction and building materials. Although replication of natural systems is one of the most promising areas of this technology, scientists are still trying to grasp their astonishing complexities. Furthermore, a nanotechnology is a rapidly expanding area of research where novel properties of materials manufactured on nanoscale can be utilized for the benefit of construction infrastructure, Therefore, the main objective of preparing this study is the importance of nanomaterials and their use in many modern industries due to their mechanical, electrical and chemical properties and for the purpose of identifying the most important methods of preparation, detection methods, types and applications of each type.  Abstract Nanomaterials (NMs) are gaining significance in technological applications due to their tunable chemical, physical, and mechanical properties and enhanced performance when compared with their bulkier counterparts. This study presents a summary of the general types of NMs and provides an overview of the various synthesis methods of nanoparticles (NPs) and their functionalization via covalent or noncovalent interactions using different methods. It highlights the techniques used for the characterization of NPs and discusses their physical and chemical properties. Due to their unique properties, NMs have several applications and have become part of our daily lives. As a result, research is gaining attention since some NPs are not easily degraded by the environment. Thus, this study also highlights research efforts into the fate, behavior, of different classes of (NMs) in the environment. General Introduction Nanotechnology is an interdisciplinary study which allows us to develop new materials with new, interesting and useful properties. These new materials are nanomaterials made from nanoparticles. Nanoparticles are ultra-small particles with exceptional properties which can direct medicines straight to the place where the human body needs them, they can make materials stronger and they can convert solar energy more efficiently. Nanoparticles possess different properties and behave differently to the classical, larger building blocks of substances. From a scientific point of view, these interesting new properties are not so much the results from the fact that nanoparticles are small, but they result from the fact that a particle consisting of a relatively limited number of molecules behaves and interacts differently with its surroundings for fundamental physical reasons. Nanoparticles and nanomaterials have gained prominence in technological advancements due to their adjustable physicochemical characteristics such as melting point, wettability, electrical and thermal conductivity, catalytic activity, light absorption and scattering resulting in enhanced performance over their bulk counterparts. By controlling the shape, size and internal order of the nanostructures, properties (electrical conductivity, colour, chemical reactivity, elasticity, etc.) can be modified. Some nanomaterials occur naturally, but of particular interest are engineered nanomaterials (EN), which are designed for, and already being used in many commercial products and processes. They can be found in such things as sunscreens, cosmetics, sporting goods, stainresistant clothing, tires, electronics, as well as many other everyday items, and are used in medicine for purposes of diagnosis, imaging and drug delivery. Engineered nanomaterials are resources designed at the molecular (nanometre) level to take advantage of their small size and novel properties which are generally not seen in their conventional, bulk counterparts. The two main reasons why materials at the nano scale can have different properties are increased relative surface area and new quantum effects. Nanomaterials have a much greater surface area to volume ratio than their conventional forms, which can lead to greater chemical reactivity and affect their strength. Also at the nano scale, quantum effects can become much more important in determining the materials properties and characteristics, leading to novel optical, electrical and magnetic behaviors. 1.1 Definition of Nanomaterials Nanoscale materials are defined as a set of substances where at least one dimension is less than approximately 100 nanometers. A nanometer is one millionth of a millimeter - approximately 100,000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. Nanomaterials are of interest because at this scale unique optical, magnetic, electrical, and other properties emerge. These emergent properties have the potential for great impacts in electronics, medicine, and other fields [1] .  1.2 History of Nanomaterials Nanotechnology involves the synthesis and application of materials in dimensions of the order of a billionth of a meter (1x10-9). This categorizes them under ultrafine particles. (Figure 1.1) reveals the size comparison of the nanoparticles against different living and nonliving species [2]. The properties of nanoparticles vary from their bulk counterpart and their chemistry [2]. The electronic structure, reactivity, and thermal and mechanical properties tend to change when the particles reach the nanoscale. Through nanotechnology, we can build materials and devices with control down to the level of individual atoms and molecules. In the past two decades, there were reports of colloids and nanoparticles designed by nature [3, 4]. The history of nanomaterials began immediately after the big bang when Nanostructures were formed in the early meteorites. Nature later evolved many other Nanostructures like seashells, skeletons etc. Nanoscaled smoke particles were formed during the use of fire by early humans. The scientific story of nanomaterials however began much later. One of the first scientific report is the colloidal gold particles synthesized by Michael Faraday as early as 1857. Nanostructured catalysts have also been investigated for over 70 years. By the early 1940’s, precipitated and fumed silica nanoparticles were being manufactured and sold in USA and Germany as substitutes for ultrafine carbon black for rubber reinforcements [1].  Over the past few years, nanomaterials (NMs) have attracted the researchers because of their nanosize, physical, biological, and chemical properties compared to their bulk materials. These NMs are classified based on their size, chemical composition, shape, and sources. Different types of NMs have been synthetized from different sources and they are being classified accordingly. Many NMs have been produced in large quantities based on the requirements for many industrial applications. The two main sources through which NMs are being produced are synthetic source and naturally occurring nanoparticles (NPs). In this chapter, we discuss the types and classifications of NMs and broadly discuss the different types of nanomaterials isolated from natural and synthetic sources [5].   1.3 Main differences between nanomaterials and bulk materials Nanomaterials are particles that have their size in 1-100 nm range at least in one dimension. We cannot see their particles through the naked eye. Moreover, examples of these materials include nanozymes, titanium dioxide nanoparticles, graphene, etc. Bulk materials are particles that have their size above 100 nm in all dimensions. We can see their particles through the naked eye. The examples of these materials include plaster, sand, gravel, cement, ore, slag, salts, etc. 