N
Non-covered charges: Costs for dental care your insurer does not cover. In some cases the service is a covered
service, but the insurer is not responsible for the entire charge. In these cases, you will be responsible for any
charge not covered by your dental plan. You may wish to call your insurer or consult your dental plan or dental
policy to determine whether certain services are included in your plan before you receive those services from your
dentist.
Non-Covered Services: Dental services not listed as a benefit. If you receive non-covered services, your dental plan
will not pay for them. Your provider will bill you. You will be responsible for the full cost. Usually payments count
toward deductible. Check with your insurer. Make sure you know what services are covered before you see your
dentist.
Nonduplication of Benefits: Occurs when you have two insurance plans. It’s how our second insurance carrier
calculates its payment. The secondary carrier calculates what it would have paid if it were your primary plan. Then
it subtracts what the other plan paid. Examples: Your primary carrier paid 80 percent. Your secondary carrier
normally covers 80 percent. Your secondary carrier would not make any additional payment. If the primary carrier
paid 50 percent. The secondary carrier would pay up to 30 percent.
O
Occlusion: Any contact between biting or chewing surfaces of upper and lower teeth.
Occlusal Guard: A removable device worn between the upper and lower teeth to prevent clenching or grinding.
[NOTE: ODONTOPLASTY WAS REMOVED]
Open Enrollment/Open Enrollment Period: Time of year when an eligible person may add, change or terminate a
dental plan or dental policy for the next contract year.
Open Panel: Allows you to receive care from any dentist. It allows any dentist to participate. Any dentist may
accept or refuse to treat patients enrolled in the plan. Open panel plans often are described as freedom of choice
plans.
Orthodontic Retainer: Appliance to stabilize teeth following orthodontic treatment.
Glossary of Dental Insurance and Dental Care Terms
12
* American Dental Association Current Dental Terminology 2011-2012, glossary.
**Dental Benefits: A Guide to Dental PPOs, HMOs And Other Managed Plans, Don Mayes, Revised Edition, 2002.
**FDA/ADA radiograph guidelines.
National Association of Dental Plans, www.nadp.org
Orthodontics and dentofacial orthopedics: Branch of dentistry. Includes the diagnosis, prevention, interception,
and correction of malocclusion. Also includes neuromuscular and skeletal abnormalities of the developing or
mature orofacial structures.
Orthodontist: Specialist who treats malocclusion and other neuromuscular and skeletal abnormalities of the teeth
and their surrounding structures.
Orthotic device: Dental appliance used to support, align, prevent or correct deformities, or to improve the
function of the oral
Out-of-Network: Care from providers not on your plan. This includes dentists and clinics. Usually, you will pay
more out of your own pocket when you receive dental care out-of-network providers.
Out-of-network benefits: Coverage for services from providers who are not under a contract with your dental
plan.
Out-of-pocket cost: The amount plan members must pay for care. Includes the difference between the amount
charged by a provider and what a health plan pays for such services.
Out-of-Pocket Maximum: The most a dental plan requires a member to pay in a year. Deductibles, co-payments
and co-insurance count toward the out-of-pocket maximum. The only dental benefits that have out-of-pocket
maximums are child benefits purchased through public exchanges, or purchased as an individual or through a small
group. The out-of-pocket maximum for one child is $350 and for more than one child is $700 in all states.
After reaching an out-of-pocket maximum, the plan pays 100% of the cost of pediatric dental services. This
only applies to covered services. Members are still responsible for services that are not covered by the
plan. Members also continue to pay their monthly premiums.
Overbilling: Stating fees as higher than actual charges. Example: when you are charged one fee and an insurance
company is billed a higher fee. This is done to use your co-payment. It also done to increase your fees solely
because you are covered under a dental benefits plan.
Overdenture: See Denture/Overdenture.
P
Palate: The hard and soft tissues forming the roof of the mouth. It separates the oral and nasal cavities.
Palliative: Treatment that relieves pain but may not remove the cause of the pain.
Partial Denture: See Denture/Partial Denture.
Glossary of Dental Insurance and Dental Care Terms
13
* American Dental Association Current Dental Terminology 2011-2012, glossary.
**Dental Benefits: A Guide to Dental PPOs, HMOs And Other Managed Plans, Don Mayes, Revised Edition, 2002.
**FDA/ADA radiograph guidelines.
National Association of Dental Plans, www.nadp.org
Participating Provider: Dentists and other licensed dental providers on your plan. They have a contract with your
plan. The contract includes set service fees.
Payer: Party responsible for paying your claims. It can be a self-insured employer, insurance company or
governmental agency.
Pediatric dentist: A dental specialist. Treats children from birth through adolescence. Provides primary and
comprehensive preventive and therapeutic oral health care. Formerly known as a pedodontist.
Periodontal: Branch of dentistry that involves the prevention and treatment of gum disease.
Periodontal disease: Inflammation process of gums and/or periodontal membrane of the teeth. Results in an
abnormally deep gingival sulcus. Possibly produces periodontal pockets and loss of supporting alveolar bone.
Periodontist: A dental specialist. Treats diseases of the supporting and surrounding tissues of the teeth.
Periodontitis: Inflammation and loss of the connective tissue of the supporting or surrounding structure of teeth.
With loss of attachment.
[NOTE: PIN REMOVED]
Plan Year: See Benefit Year.
Plaque: A soft sticky substance. Composed largely of bacteria and bacterial derivatives. It forms on teeth daily.
Point of Service (POS) Plan: A dental plan that allows you to choose at the time of dental service whether you will
go to a provider within your dental plan's network or get dental care from a provider outside the network.
[NOTE: PORCELAIN/CERAMIC REMOVED]
[NOTE: POST REMOVED]
Preauthorization: A process that your dental plan or insurer uses to make a decision that particular dental services
are covered. Your plan may require preauthorization for certain services, such as crowns, before you receive them.
Preauthorization requirements are generally waived if you need emergency care. Sometimes called prior
authorization.
[NOTE: PRECERTIFICATION REMOVED]
Predetermination: A process where a dentist submits a treatment plan to the payer before treatment begins. The
payer reviews the treatment plan. The payer notifies you and your dentist about one or more of the following:
your eligibility, covered services, amounts payable, co-payment and deductibles and plan maximums. See preauthorization.
Glossary of Dental Insurance and Dental Care Terms
14
* American Dental Association Current Dental Terminology 2011-2012, glossary.
**Dental Benefits: A Guide to Dental PPOs, HMOs And Other Managed Plans, Don Mayes, Revised Edition, 2002.
**FDA/ADA radiograph guidelines.
National Association of Dental Plans, www.nadp.org
Pre-existing condition: A dental condition that exists for a set time prior to enrollment in a dental plan, regardless
of whether the condition has been formally diagnosed. The only pre-existing condition that is common for dental
plans or policies is a missing tooth.
[REMOVED PRECIOUS OR HIGH NOBLE METALS – SEE METALS, CLASSIFICATIONS –ACCORDING TO CDT]
Pretreatement Estimate: See predetermination. **
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO): See DPPO.
Premedication: The use of medications prior to dental procedures.
Prepaid dental plan: A method of funding dental care costs in advance of services. For a defined population.
Premium: The amount you pay to a dental insurance company for dental coverage. The dental insurance company
generally recalculates the premium each policy year. This amount is usually paid in monthly installments. When
you receive dental insurance through an employer, the employer may pay a portion of the premium and you pay
the rest, often through payroll deductions.
Preventive Services: See diagnostic and preventive services.
Primary dentition: Another name for baby teeth. See deciduous.
Primary payer: The third party payer with first responsibility in a benefit determination.
Prophylaxis: Scaling and polishing procedure. Performed to remove coronal plaque, calculus and
stains. **
Prosthodontic: Branch of dentistry that deals with the repair of teeth by crowns, inlays or onlays and/or the
replacement of missing teeth and related mouth or jaw structures by bridges, dentures, implants or other artificial
devises.
Prosthodontist: A dental specialist. Restores natural teeth. Replaces missing teeth with artificial substitutes.
Provider: A dentist or other dental care professional, or clinic that is accredited, licensed or certified to provide
dental services in their state, and is providing services within the scope of that accreditation, license or
certification.
Provider network: Dentists and other dental care professionals who agree to provide dental care to members of a
dental plan, under the terms of a contract.