IV. PROBLEMS WITH SALARY ARBITRATION
 

 The requirements laid out by the collective bargaining agreement still leave much room for problems between the players and the teams. The first problem stems from the final offer or high/low format of arbitration procedure. In requiring the arbitrator to chose one amount or the other makes the final offer format unique. The arbitrator cannot reach a compromise between the two parties' offers. Since the arbitrator can only choose one side, many owners feel that this may be the root cause of the increasing salaries in baseball. The owners feel that abolition of salary arbitration is proper because it becomes a "win-win" situation for the players. After salary arbitration, "the players will always come out better than they were before." [EN 24] The issue for the owners is that if they present an amount that is significantly low, the arbitrator will tend to favor the player and choose the higher amount. [EN 25] In order to prevent this from happening, many teams tend to keep their amount submitted higher than they would like to prevent the arbitrator from choosing the higher amount given by players. 
 

 However, the counter argument is that the final offer format forces both sides to give a reasonable offer. During the arbitration process, the parties will be more concerned with how much the other side will offer. The parties will also concentrate on making their own offer fairer, so that the arbitrator will select it. 
 

 The second issue with salary arbitration is whether the evidence introduced between the two sides can affect the ongoing relationship between the team and the player after the arbitration hearings. According to the CBA criteria for salary arbitration, a team can essentially introduce evidence that may degrade a player and his accomplishments in the arbitration hearings. However, since the player will likely be returning to the same team the following year, the team may tend to hold back sensitive information which may offend the player. An arbitrator from a prominent New York law firm that handles some of the arbitration proceedings for the New York Yankees stated in a phone conversation on March 4, 2002, that most teams tend to hold back degrading and malicious information about some of their players because they are afraid of the repercussions in the following year. For example, many teams will not disclose information in an arbitration hearing about how the team manager, teammates, or members of the organization feel about a certain player. If this information is negative, it will not be a comfortable situation for that player if he remains with the team during the following season.
 

 Some teams are afraid of introducing the degrading and detrimental evidence of a player and his conduct to prevent the player from being offended and taking those feelings of betrayal with him
 to the field the following season. The arbitrator gave an example of a player being affected by an arbitration hearing in the National Hockey League ("NHL"). The case involved the owner of the
 New York Islanders who went into a salary arbitration hearing with their then goalie. The owner introduced humiliating evidence into the arbitration hearing about that goalie. The goalie felt so
  betrayed by his team and the whole process, he refused to return to the Islanders the following season. Thus, the goalie was traded because of his refusal to play directly due to the arbitration
 hearings. To avoid an outcome such as this, most professional teams avoid introducing humiliating and degrading evidence of the players that are in salary arbitration in order to keep a
 positive ongoing relationship the following season. 
 

 The other major problem of salary arbitration in baseball is what happens when either party wins. If the owner wins, the player may feel betrayed. A player may feel that he played well for the past few seasons to deserve a higher salary. By losing the arbitration hearing, the player may avoid playing up to his full potential in the following season due to resentment towards the team. There is also the possibility the player may play even better the following
 season with the intention of not returning to his present team. A player may play beyond his potential to impress other teams and will not even consider re-signing with his present team as a free agent. A negative ongoing relationship is severely detrimental to baseball. The game becomes one of politics and business and not one of enjoyment or love for the game. There is also a direct affect on the fans and the economic prosperity of the game. On the flip side, there may be problems with how the player may be treated if he wins the salary arbitration. The owners may feel that the player's salary is too high for his ability. They may chose to reduce his playing time or change where he bats in the line-up, thus affecting his offensive output. In the case of a pitcher, the team may choose to put him in a more mediocre role. This may affect the player's ability to negotiate for a higher salary in the future during free
 agency. The integrity of the game is affected by the ongoing relationship between the player and the team after arbitration.