CHAPTER ONE
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
1. Introduction to infectious diseases
Generally infectious diseases result from bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites. Despite decades of
dramatic progress in their treatment and prevention, infectious diseases remain a major cause of
death and are responsible for worsening the living conditions of many millions of people around the
world especially in the developing countries. Infections frequently challenge the clinician’s diagnostic
skill and must be considered in the differential diagnosis of syndromes affecting a multitude of organ
systems. Infectious diseases often do not occur in isolated cases; rather they spread through a group
exposed from a point source (e.g. a water supply contaminated with cholera) or from individual to
individual (e.g. via respiratory droplets spreading tuberculosis). Many factors affect the likelihood of
acquiring infections which include, host, environmental microbial factors.
Host and Environmental Factors
For any infectious process to occur, the parasite and the host must first encounter each other. Factors
such as geography (e.g. altitude and malaria), environment (e.g. mosquito breeding site and malaria),
disease vectors and host behavior (e.g. sexual behavior and sexually transmitted diseases) thus
influence the likelihood of infection. Many Host Factors such as age, immunization, prior illness,
nutritional status, pregnancy, coexisting illnesses and emotional status all have some impact on the
risk of infection after exposure to a particular pathogen.
Medical care itself can increase the patient’s risk of acquiring an infection. This can occur in several
ways: through contact with the pathogens during hospitalization, through injections, surgical incisions,
via mucosal surfaces by end tracheal tubes and bladder catheters, through the introduction of foreign bodies, through alteration of the natural flora with antibiotics, and through treatment with suppressive
drugs such as steroids.
Microbial Factors
Infection involves complicated interaction of parasites and host and inevitably affects both. In most
cases a pathogenic process consisting of several steps is required for the development of infections. 
Internal Medicine
2
Since the competent host has a complex series of defense mechanisms in place to prevent infection,
the successful parasite must utilize specific strategies at each of these steps. The specific strategies
used by bacteria, viruses, and parasites have some similarities, but the details are unique not only for
each class of organism but also for individual species within a class;
Invasion;
Microorganisms attached to mucosal surface use specific mechanisms to invade deeper structures.
For example, meningococci and gonococci penetrate and traverse mucosal epithelial cells by
transcytotic mechanism.
Tropism;
In order to infect a host successfully, many pathogens occupy highly specific place within the host and
thus are tropic to a particular body site or cell type. For example, malaria sporozoites are rapidly
cleared from the blood into the hepatocyts, where they undergo maturation and release into the circulation; trophozoites in turn can infect only the erythrocytes.
Microbial virulence strategies;
Microbes have developed a variety of strategies for escaping the immunity. For example, some
pathogenic organisms elaborate toxins and enzymes that facilitate the invasion of the host and are
often responsible for the disease state and many bacteria are encapsulated with polysaccharides that
allow them to invade and deposit in the absence of specific antibodies.
Immune response:
Is a defense mechanism developed by the host for recognizing and responding to microorganisms. It
is divided I to two major classes. Innate and Acquired Immunity.
Innate immunity (Natural Immunity):
Is first line of defense and serves to protect the host with out prior exposure to the infectious agent.
This immune response is nonspecific and has no memory. Examples of Innate immunity include skin
and mucous mebrane, phagocytoses by macrophages and nutrophils, complement system etc
Acquired (Adaptive) Immunity:
Is specific immune mechanism developed against a particular organism. It takes time to develop and it has long standing memory.
It has two major arms: 
Internal Medicine
3
• Cellular immunity: comprising T- lymphocytes, NK cells
• Humeral Immunity: comprises of B-Lymphocytes and antibodies produced by plasma cells.
Laboratory diagnosis
The lab diagnosis of infections requires the demonstration, either
1. Direct microscopic visualization of pathogens in clinical material (e.g. Plasmodium species in
blood films) or the growth of microorganisms in the laboratory (e.g. culture) or
2. Indirect (e.g. antibody / serology test for HIV), of viral, bacterial, mycotic, or parasitic agents in
tissues, fluids, or excreta of the host.
Treatment;
Optimal therapy for infectious diseases requires a broad knowledge of medicine and careful clinical
judgment. Life threatening infections such as bacterial meningitis and sepsis require urgent initiation
of therapy often before a specific infective organism is identified. Antimicrobial agents must be chosen
empirically and must be against the range of potential infectious agents consistent with the clinical
condition. In contrast, good clinical judgment sometimes dictates withholding of antimicrobials in a self
limited process or until a specific diagnosis is made. Certain infections (e.g. peritonitis, necrotizing
fascitis, and abscess) require surgery as a primary means of cure; in these conditions, antibiotics play
only as an adjunctive role.
References:
1. Kasper L., Braunwald E., Harrison’s principles of Internal medicine, 16th Edition, Intruducion to
infectious diseases, pages 695-700. 