Discussion
 Our most important finding is the inverse correlation between the presence of a chronic disease and the likelihood of treatment of an unrelated disorder. In no case did the presence of the chronic disease justify withholding an effective medical treatment. The results are compatible with the theory that one disease provides protection against other diseases, but this theory is unlikely to be correct, given medical pathophysiology and shared underlying predisposing factors.19–22 Instead, our findings suggest a shortfall in health care — specifically, that unrelated disorders are relatively neglected in patients with chronic medical diseases.
 Our work has several limitations, of which three merit emphasis. First, the study was not a randomized trial: it is not possible to assign patients randomly to have or not to have a chronic disease. Subtle confounding could contribute to and possibly justify the observed differences. However, imbalances related to age, sex, insurance status or carrier, ability to pay, or random chance would not explain the findings. Second, optimal rates of secondary treatments are controversial. In theory, our findings could be explained by postulating the overtreatment of patients who do not have chronic diseases. If true, this postulate could represent a potentially more common failure in medical decision making. Finally, the mechanism underlying the results remains a topic for future research — in particular, the question of whether the second disease is not detected in the presence of the first or whether it is detected but not treated.
 The observed results might arise from several sources. Patients with chronic diseases may be exhausted and reluctant to accept multiple interventions. Clinicians are often busy and may strive to keep care simple, particularly if they do not have relatively more time for the patients with relatively more complicated conditions. A chronic disease — particularly chronic psychosis — may also limit communication between patient and doctor. Universal insurance coverage could also contribute if the implicit goal of equity is achieved by doing something for all but a lot for none. The results, however, cannot be attributed either to a tendency toward prescribing multiple medications for the elderly or to barriers in access to medical care, both of which work against finding any negative associations.23–25 Similarly, the results cannot be attributed to fraud in which more than one person uses the same health insurance card.26,27
 Unrelated treatments are not always indicated for patients who have chronic diseases. Chronic diseases are sometimes associated with reduced life expectancy, making long-term preventive therapy unrewarding. Adding supplementary medications often increases the risk of unwanted drug interactions and the potential for an adverse event. Prescribing additional medications for an unrelated disorder might also alter a patient's compliance with essential medications and indirectly cause harm. Time constraints, communication problems, the patient's preferences, and the priorities of the specialist involved sometimes make it difficult to address more than one problem effectively in any one patient. Finally, it is often sensible to postpone minor treatments until major problems are resolved.
 The unrelated treatments we chose had important implications for each selected chronic disease. Patients with diabetes mellitus are at increased risk for atherosclerosis and may be particularly likely to benefit from estrogen-replacement therapy.28,29 The reserve capacity of patients with pulmonary emphysema is seriously compromised, and they may be unable to tolerate even a small cardiovascular event.30,31 Patients with psychotic syndromes are often sensitive to discomfort and theoretically might have further worsening of their mental status as a result of joint pain.32,33 In all three examples, inadvertent undertreatment may have consequences. Furthermore, these examples are similar to other reported cases of mistakes in the care of patients who have more than one illness.34–36