Do Camera Megapixels Matter in 2024? (For Photography)
 

 Having more megapixels on your digital camera or smartphone can be useful.
 

 However, do megapixels matter when it comes to overall image quality?
 

 Photographers love to discuss the merits of more camera megapixels in digital photography.
 

 In this guide, I’ll explain why having more megapixels isn’t always necessary… nor a good thing.
 

 You’ll also discover which digital cameras and smartphones have the highest pixel count in 2024.
 

 What Do MegaPixels Mean on a Camera?
 

 The megapixels on a camera refer to the pixel count present in the sensor. For example, if you have a 24 MP camera, it means that the final image will have 24 million pixels.
 

 The total pixel count is what’s known as the camera resolution. You can calculate the resolution by multiplying the number of pixels on the horizontal side of the sensor by the ones on the vertical side.
 

 If the camera sensor has a 2:3 aspect ratio – this means that the 24 megapixels are distributed as 6000 on one side and 4000 in the other.
 How many megapixels can the human eye see?
 

 Well, the human eye doesn’t actually have pixels. So, comparing the human eye to a camera’s sensor is not like comparing the resolution of two cameras. What we know is an estimate calculated by photographer and scientist Dr. Roger N. Clark.
 

 Using very complex math, he determined that the human eye ‘resolution’ is 576 megapixels. You can learn more about how he reached this result on his website – Clarkvision.
 

 However, according to an article published by Lasik – 576 MP is the resolution reached when moving. Instead, on a single glance, the human eye has a 5 to 15 MP ‘resolution’.
 

 Are There Any Drawbacks to Having Too Many Megapixels?
 

 The first drawback of having more megapixels is that you’ll have bigger files. This means that you’ll fill the memory card faster and you’ll need more storage space either on your hard drive or a cloud service to back them up.
 

 This is a fair compromise when you actually need high-resolution images. However, if you have large files because they have more megapixels than you need, then it’s not worth it.
 

 Another potential drawback is the slower processing time. This may affect you when shooting, transferring, and editing the files.
 

 Large files in-camera take longer to be saved in the memory card. If you shoot in burst mode – for example, it could diminish the fps.
 

 It could also mean slowing the processing to transfer, cull, and edit your photos – this also depends on how powerful is your computer.
 

 Also, when the camera sensors aren’t big enough for the amount of pixels, you’ll have a bigger image resolution but not higher image quality. You’ll probably have issues like noise and reduced dynamic range.
 When Are More Megapixels An Advantage?
 

 A printer with a woman's face on it.
 

 Large format printing process with Mimaki machine. Credit: Helene.3160, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons
 

 More megapixels are better when you’re talking about print size. The more megapixels you have, the bigger you can print your image.
 

 Another situation in which more megapixels are beneficial is when you need to crop your image.
 

 This is because even if you lose megapixels by cutting out part of your photo – the file still has enough resolution to print or zoom on your screen.
 

  How to Choose Photo Resolution & Size for Printing Or Online Use
 

 How Many Megapixels Do Photographers Actually Need?
 

 If you’re wondering how many megapixels you need to print high-resolution images, you need to multiply the print size by 300 – which is the standard dpi for photographic printing.
 

 So, if you need to print an 8″ x 10″ photo, it needs to have 2,400 x 3,000 pixels. To print a 16″ x 24″ you need a file with 4,800 x 7,200 pixels and so on.
 How many megapixels do professional photographers use?
 

 Unfortunately, there isn’t a straight answer to this. The megapixels required by a professional photographer depend on the type of photos they do and how the images are going to be used.
 

 To give an approximate number, most professional DSLR and mirrorless cameras have a resolution between 24 and 36 MP. However, some professionals use medium-format digital cameras that range from 50 to 100 MP.
 How many megapixels do you need for wedding photography?
 

 Most professional wedding photographers can make do with a resolution ranging from 20 to 24 MP. However, depending on the prints and wedding albums you plan to deliver (and also how much you usually crop your photos), having higher-resolution cameras can be an advantage.
 Does the megapixel count change if you shoot in RAW or JPG?
 

 The number of megapixels on the RAW and JPG files may be different depending on the camera settings.
 

 Most cameras allow you to choose the size of the RAW and JPG files they save. For example, I can set a Canon 90D to shoot in C-RAW and save a raw file of 32MP (6960 x 4640) and a small file JPG file of 3.8MP (2400 x 1600).
 

 Each camera will have different sizes available for each file type – you’ll need to check yours on the user’s manual or by doing a quick Google search.
 

 What About Megapixels and Smartphone Photography?
 

  
 

 You’ve probably seen smartphones that advertise enough megapixels to beat any DSLR or mirrorless cameras on the market.
 

 This may lead you to wonder why isn’t professional photographers don’t use smartphones to take photos for their jobs.
 

 Well, camera lenses, the ability to sync with flashes, and many other features make this impossible.
 

 However, it’s not just that, it’s also because of how smartphones get to that pixel count and what that means in resolution and quality.
 

 Due to their size, it’s impossible for them to actually fit such a larger sensor inside the device. So, smartphone manufacturers incorporate advanced technologies like pixel binning or computational photography to improve image quality without increasing the number of individual pixels.