International Journal of Engineering Inventions 

ISSN: 2278-7461, www.ijeijournal.com 
Volume 1, Issue 3 (September 2012) PP: 06-11 



Bit Error Rate of Mobile Wimax (Phy) Under Different 
Communication Channels and Modulation Technique 

T.Manochandar 1 , R.Krithika 2 

'Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, VRS College of engineering and technology, 

Villupuram- 607 107 '.TamilNadu 
2 Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, E.S College oj < I in , , "• and technology, 

ViUupuram-605 602. TamilNadu 



Abstract — Mobile Wimax is a broadband wireless solution that enables the convergence of mobile and fixed broadband 
network, through a common wide area broadband radio access technology and flexible network architecture. The 
Performance of mobile Wimax under varying channel is one of the interesting research interests. Most of the most 
existing systems, based on performance and evaluation under channel condition are limited to AWGN, ITU etc in mobile 
Wimax. In this paper the performance of mobile Wimax (PHY layer) under SUI channel models in addition to different 
data rates and modulation techniques were analyzed. The simulation cavers important performance parameters like Bit 
Error Rate and Signal to Noise Ratio. 

Keywords— Wimax, BER, SNR, BPSK, OFDMA 

I. INTRODUCTION 

IEEE802.16e is a global broadband wireless access standard capable of delivering high data rates to fixed users as 
well as portable and mobile ones over long distance [l].In mobile Wimax air interface adopts orthogonal frequency division 
multiple access (OFDMA) for improved multi-path performance in non-line-of sight (NLOS) environment. Mobile Wimax 
extends the OFDM PHY layer to support terminal mobility and multiple-access. The resulting technology is Scalable 
OFDMA. Data streams to and from indh idual users are multiplexed to groups of sub channel on the downlink and uplink. 
By adopting Scalable PHY architecture, mobile Wimax is able to support a wide range of bandwidths. 

The performance of the WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) can be evaluated by using 
the Stanford University Interim (SUI) channel models which has a set of six channels for terrain types [3J.With different data 
rates, coding schemes and modulation techniques. 

The mobile WiMAX standard builds on the principles of OFDM by adopting a Scalable OFDMA-based PHY 
layer (SOFDMA) [4J. SOFDMA supports a wide range of operating bandwidths to flexibl) address the need for various 
spectrum allocation and application requirements. 
The simulation done in the paper covers important performance such as Bit Error Rate and Signal to Noise Ratio. 

II. WIMAX PHYSICAL LAYER 

This project deals with the performances of Bit Error Rate and Signal to Noise Ratio in mobile WiMAX physical 
layer. The block diagram of the physical layer of mobile WiMAX diagram is given in Figure 1 . The transferring of data or 
receiving the data is done through the physical layer of WiMAX. So the uplink and the downlink of the message were done 
on the physical layer of WiMAX. There are three levels in the physical layer of mobile WiMAX physical layer are 

• Bit level processing 

• OFDM symbol level processing 

• Digital IF processing 

Each levels of physical layer of WiMAX consist of certain processes for transferring the data at uplink region and 
receiving of data at downlink region consists of encoder, decoder, symbol mapper and randomizer etc., Every processes were 
done in order to improve the performance of the mobility condition of mobile wimax. In this paper the perfor 
analyzed by the signal to noise ratio and the bit error rate 



Bit Error Rale Of Mobile Wimax (Plix) Under Different Communication,,, 




m^v 



Figure: 1. Block Diagram of Wimax Physical Layer 
Table. 1 Parameter of mobile wima x physical layer 



Parameter 


Value 


FFT size 


128 


512 


1024 


2048 


Channel 
Bandwidth(MHz) 


1.25 


5 


10 


20 


Subcarrier Frequency 

spacing 

(KHz) 


10.94 


Useful Symbol Period 


91.4 


Guard Time 


1/32,1/8,1/6,1/4 



III. CHANNEL 

The medium between the transmitting antenna and the receiving antenna is said to be the channel. The profile of 
received signal can be obtained from that of the transmitted signal, if we have a model of the medium between the two. The 
model of the medium is called channel model. 



Bit Error Rate Of Mobile Winuix (Plix) Under Different Communication... 



Y (f) ->oulpui signal 
H (f) ->channel response 
X (f) ->input signal 



Y (f) =X (f) H (f) +n (f) 



A. Stanford Universit) [nterim (SUI) Channel Models: 

It is a set of six channel models representing three terrain types and a variety of Doppler spreads, delay spread and 
mainly the line-of-sight/non-line-of-site conditions that are typical of the continental. The terrain type A, B, C is same 

as those defined in Erceg model [10]. The multipath fading is modeled as a tapped delay line with 3 taps with non-uniform 
delays. The gain associated w ith each tap is characterized by a Rician Distribution and the maximum Doppler frequency. 

In a multipath environment, the received power r has a Rician distribution, whose Pdf is given by: 



o LOS component and the pdf of the power becomes 



Pdf(r)=r/o 2 e [ -* ac2+A2a2] Io(rA/o 2 ) < r < a 



This is also known as Raleigh distribution. 
The ratio K=A / (2o2) in the Rician case represents the ratio of LOS component to NLOS component and is called the "K- 
Factor" or "Rician Factor." 

The general structure for the SUI channel model is as shown below in figure. This structure is for Multiple Input 
Multiple Output (MIMO) channels and includes other configurations like Single Input Single Output (SISO) and Single 
Input Multiple Output (SIMO) as subsets. 




Figure 2.SUI Channel Model 

Power Distribution For each tap a set of complex zero-mean Gaussian distributed numbers is generated with a 
e of 0.5 for the real and imaginary part, so that the total average power of this distribution is 1. This yields a 
normalized Rayleigh distribution (equivalent to Rice with K=0) for the magnitude of the complex coefficients. If a Rician 
distribution (K>0 implied) is needed, a constant path component m is added to the Rayleigh set of coefficients. The ratio of 
powers between this constant part and the Rayleigh (variable) part is specified by the K-factor. For this general case, we 
show how to distribute the power correctly by first stating die total power P of each tap: 



Where m is the comple: 



of the complex Gaussian set. Second, the ratio of powers is K=m 2 /|o 2 l. 



T able 2: Terrain type and Doppler spread for SUI channel mod el 



Channel 


Terrain 

Type 


spread 


Spread 


LOS 


SUI-1 


C 


Low 


Low 


High 


SUI-2 


C 


Low 


Low 


High 


SUI-3 


B 


Low 


Low 


Low 


SUI-4 


B 


High 


Moderate 


Low 


SUI-5 


A 


Low 


High 


Low 


SUI-6 


A 


High 


High 


High 



Bit Error Rale Of Mobile Wimax (Phy) Under Different Communication... 



In the SUI channel model, parameter for the SUI 1 and SUI 2 channel model has been tabulated in 3 and 4 
respectively for the reference. BER performance is evaluated in this channel models. Depending on the performance 
parameter for the SUI channel, the performances of wimax physical layer are evaluated through the performance graph. 





Table 3 SUI -1 Channel Model 




Tapl 


Tap 2 


Tap 
3 


Units 


Delay 





0.4 


0.9 


[IS 


Power(omni antenna) 
90% K-facto<omni) 

0<OIM 



4 
20 


-15 






-20 






db 


Power(30 antenna) 
90% k-facto<30°) 



16 
72 


-21 






-32 






db 


Doppler 


0.4 


0.3 


0.5 


Hz 


< , - , iii 
Gain Reduction Factor: GRF=0db 
Normalisation Factor: 

F^i=-0.1771db 

FV=-0.0371db 


Terrain Type : C 
Omni antenna :tems = 0.1 11 [is 
Overall K:K=3 .3 (90%) 
K= .10.4(75%) 
30 u 3iitenna:i[j!]Ms =0.042 \is 
Overall K:K= 14. 0(90%) 
K=44 2(7 4>) 



Table 4 SUI -2 Channel Mo del 




Tapl 


Tap 2 


3 


Units 


Delay 





0.4 


1.1 


us 


Power(ortmi antenna) 
90% K-facto<omni) 
73% K-facto<omni) 



11 


-12 






-15 






db 


Poweri i0' minni i 
90% k-facto<30°) 

75% K-facto<30*) 




36" 






-27 






db 


Doppler 


0.2 


0.15 


0.25 


Hz 


Antenna c on elation. p= . '. 

O am Re duction F actor: GRF =2 db 

Normalization Factor: 

F Mmi =-0.3930db 

F 3 o°=- n .07(58clb 


Terrain Type : C 

Omni antenna : tbke = 0.202 us 

Overall K: K=l .6 (90%) 

K=5.1(75%) 

30 antenna:T EWS =0.06QLS 

Overall K:K=<5 .9(90%) 

K=21.S(75%) 



For a 30° antenna beam width, 2.3 times smaller RMS delay spread is used when compared to an omnidirectional 
antenna RMS delay spread. Consequently, the 2nd tap power is attenuated additional 6 dB and the 3rd tap power is 
attenuated additional 12 dB (effect of antenna pattern, delays remain the same). The simulation results for all the six 
channels arc e\ aluated. The above experiments are done using the simulation in Matlab communication tool box. 



IV. 

The output for the perfc 
MATLAB coding with BPSK modulati 



SIMULATION RESULTS 

of mobile WiMAX was estimated by the BER and the SNR plot t 
The bandwidth used in the experiment was 3.5 MHz 



Bit Error Rate Of Mobile Wima.x (Phy) Under Different Communication... 






Figure3.BER curve for BPSK modulation 

The output for the performance of mobile WiMAX was estimated by the Bit Error Rate and the Signal to Noise 
Ratio plot using the MATLAB coding with Quadrature Phase Shift Keying modulation technique is given below in figure 4. 

BER of the received symbols. ( G=0.25.BW=3.5MHz and modulation of QPSK ) 




Figure 4. BER curve for QPSK modulation 

The output for the performance of mobile WiMAX was estimated by the BER and the SNR plot using the 
MATLAB coding with 16QAM modulation. It is illustrated in the figure5. 




Figure5. BER curve for 16QAM modulation 



Bit Error Rate Of Mobile Wimax (Phy) Under Different Communication... 

The output for the performance of mobile Wimax was estimated by the BER and the SNR plot using the 
MATLAB coding with 64QAM modulation and graphical illustration done as in figure 6. 




Figure6. BER curve for 64QAM modulation 



V. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, the performance of mobile WIMAX physical layer for OFDMA on different channel condition 
assisted by Mobile IP(Internet protocol) for mobility management was analyzed. The analysis demonstrated that the 
modulation and coding rate had a greater impact on the relative performance between the different SU1 channel conditions. 
The performance was analyzed under SUI channel models with different modulation techniques for mobility management. It 
is found from the performance graphs that SUI channel 5 and 6 performs better than the conventional ones. 



REFERENCES 

IEEE 2010 Omar Arafat,K.Dimyati, a study of physical layer of Mobile WiMax under different communication 

channels & modulation technique. 

[2JIEEE std 802.16 Etm-2004"Part 16: Air Interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless Access system,"Feb 

2004. 

Md.ZahidHasan.Mu.A .hiaiiillslam, Comparative Study of Different Guard Time Intervals to Improve the BER 

Performance of WiM AX Systems to Minimize the Effects of ISI and 1CI under Adaptive Modulation Techniques 

over SUI-1 and AWGN Communication Channels, (IICSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and 

Information Security, Vol. 6, No.2, 2009. 

IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access Working Group Simulating the SUI Channel Models Li-Chun Wang 

Department of Communications Engineering National Chiao Tung University Hsinchu,Taiwan. 

Mai Tran, G Zaggaoulos and A .Nix" Mobile WiMAX MIMO performance Analysis: Downlink and Uplink", 

PIMRC2008. 

J.GAndews, A.Ghoshand R.Muhamed, Fundamentals of WiMAX Understanding broadband Wireless Networks, 

"Prentice Hall, Feb 2007. 

RajJain,@aum.org,"ChannelModelaTutorial", feb21,2007 submitted to wimax forum at aum. 

M.S. Smith and C. Tappenden, 'Additional enhancements to interim channel models for G2 MMDS fixed wireless 

applications," IEEE 802.16.3c-00/53 

M.S.Smith, J.E.J. Dalley, "A new methodology for deriving path loss models from cellular drive test data", 

Proc.AP2000 Conference, Davos, Switzerland, April 2000. 

V. Erceget.al, "A model for the multipath delay profile of fixed wireless channels," IEEE JSAC, vol. 17, no. 3, 

March 1999, pp. 399-410. 

L.J.Greenstein, V. Erceg, Y.S. Yeh, and M.V. Clark, "A new path-gain/delay-spread propagation model for digital 

cellular channels," IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 46, no. 2, May 1997. 

J.W. Porter and J.A. Thweatt, "Microwave propagation characteristics in the MMDS frequency band," ICC'2000 

Conference Proceedings, pp. 1578-1582. 

L.J. Greenstein, S. Ghassemzadeh, V.Erceg, and DG. Michelson, "Ricean K-factors in narrowband fixed wireless 

channels: Theory, experiments, and statistical models," WPMC'99 Conference Proceedings, Amsterdam, 

September 1999. 



