State Right of Publicity Laws
The ROP is protected in some form by the laws of most U.S. states, and the number of states that
recognize this right has expanded over the past several decades. One study found that 35 states recognized
the ROP as of 2020. ROP laws generally create a private right of action for the unauthorized commercial
use of another person’s NIL. For example, if a manufacturer uses a famous athlete’s name or face in a TV
commercial without her permission, the athlete could sue the manufacturer for violating her ROP, and a
court could order the manufacturer to pay damages and stop showing the commercial.
What constitutes an unauthorized commercial use of NIL can vary from state to state. Some states’ ROP
laws may apply only to advertising, while others more broadly apply to any use that commercially
benefits the user, such as video game or comic book characters based on real people.
Other notable differences between the ROP laws of various states concern questions such as:
• Is the ROP protected by statute, common law, or both? Twenty-five states have
enacted statutes protecting the ROP. In some of these states, including California, the
ROP is protected by both statutes and common law (law derived from court opinions). In
Congressional Research Service
https://crsreports.congress.gov
LSB11052
Congressional Research Service 2
other states, including Delaware, the ROP is protected by common law only, sometimes
as an application of a common law “right of privacy.”
• What parts of a person’s identity does the ROP protect? The ROP often only protects
a person’s NIL, voice, and signature. In some states, the ROP also includes someone’s
“distinctive appearance, gestures, or mannerisms.” Courts have construed certain states’
ROP laws to protect more abstract aspects of personal identity, finding defendants liable
for using an image of a famous driver’s race car, a blonde robot performing Vanna
White’s role on a game show, or the catch phrase “here’s Johnny.”
• Do all individuals enjoy the ROP? State laws vary as to whether all persons or only
those with “commercially valuable” NIL (such as celebrities) may assert ROP claims.
• Does the ROP survive a person’s death? In some states, the ROP is descendible,
meaning it can be asserted by one’s heirs after a person dies. States that recognize a
descendible (or postmortem) ROP differ as to their duration, with postmortem rights
lasting 20 years in Virginia, 70 years in California, and 100 years in Oklahoma, for
instance. Under Tennessee law, postmortem ROP may last indefinitely. In other states, the
ROP is not descendible, or else courts have not resolved the issue.
Often, the law of the state in which a person is domiciled—or, where they were domiciled when they
died—governs their ROP. Indiana’s ROP statute, however, allows suit “regardless of a personality’s
domicile” for infringing materials “disseminated within Indiana.” This law may allow non-Indiana
plaintiffs to sue for infringing materials that are made available in Indiana via television or the internet.
Intersection of Right of Publicity and Federal IP Laws
Although the ROP is distinct from the forms of IP already protected by federal law, it is related in some
ways to trademarks and copyrights. If Congress chooses to regulate the ROP via federal law, it may
consider how best to harmonize the ROP with existing trademark and copyright laws.
Trademarks
While the ROP generally protects commercial uses of a person’s identity, trademarks protect commercial
uses of words, names, and other symbols that distinguish one person’s goods from others. The ROP may
overlap with trademarks in cases where aspects of a person’s NIL can be trademarked. A person’s name,
for instance, may be trademarked if it acquires a distinctive meaning and is used commercially to identify
goods or services (e.g., McDonald’s). The ROP may be seen as serving a similar function to trademarks,
although some scholars have criticized the theoretical foundations and expansion of the ROP.
Trademark infringement occurs when someone without authorization uses a trademark in a way that
creates a likelihood of confusion for consumers. The Lanham Act—the federal trademark law—also
establishes a cause of action for “false endorsement,” which provides additional protection that overlaps
with the ROP. False endorsement occurs when a person’s identity is used in a way that is likely to confuse
consumers into believing that the person recommends a product. In 2023, for instance, actor Tom Hanks
alerted fans that an AI-generated replica of him was being used to advertise a dental plan without his
permission; such scenarios might give rise to both state ROP and Lanham Act false endorsement claims.
State ROP laws can provide broader protection than the Lanham Act, however, as they often prohibit
unauthorized commercial uses of NIL regardless of whether they imply any sponsorship or confuse
consumers. In addition, some courts have held only individuals with “recognizability” (such as Hanks)
may sue for false endorsement, whereas many state laws allow all individuals to sue for ROP violations.
Congressional Research Service 3
Copyrights
Copyrights protect original works of authorship that are “fixed” (i.e., recorded) in a “tangible medium,”
including books, paintings, music recordings, and films. The Copyright Act gives copyright owners the
“exclusive right” to reproduce (copy), perform, display, and distribute copyrighted works and to make
derivative works (adaptations) from them. Generally, a work’s author automatically owns the copyright
but may sell or license it to others. In short, whereas ROP laws prohibit unauthorized uses of another
person’s identity, copyright law prohibits unauthorized uses of another’s creative works. As one
illustration, in January 2024, the estate of comedian George Carlin filed a lawsuit based on an
unauthorized comedy program delivered in an AI-generated imitation of Carlin’s voice. The complaint
claims defendants infringed their copyrights by making copies of Carlin’s works to train the AI model—
similar to other AI-related copyright lawsuits noted in a separate Legal Sidebar—and that defendants
violated Carlin’s ROP under California law by using his NIL to promote the comedy program and other
media.
The ROP intersects with copyright law inasmuch as both fictional and nonfictional copyrighted works
often include the NIL of real people, including descriptions, portrayals, recordings, or performances of
those people. For example, people depicted in photographs often do not hold the copyright, since the
photographer is usually considered the author, but they may have ROP interests implicated by how those
photos are used. These rights may come into conflict, such as when a copyright owner displays
photographs in a way that commercially exploits the NIL of people shown in the photographs.
Section 301 of the Copyright Act provides that the Copyright Act preempts (supersedes) any state law
rights that are “equivalent to” a copyright holder’s exclusive rights. Some commentators argue courts
have inconsistently applied Section 301 in cases where copyrights conflict with the ROP. Some courts
have dismissed lawsuits that allege copyright holders violated the ROP by exercising their exclusive
rights under the Copyright Act. For instance, in 2017, one court held that Section 301 preempted a suit
claiming the sale of photographs of NCAA athletes violated the athletes’ ROP. Other courts have held that
Section 301 does not preempt ROP claims based on advertising. For example, one court held that a sports
announcer’s ROP claim was not preempted where an excerpt of his voice from a copyrighted broadcast
was used in a commercial for a video game. Congress could clarify the scope of copyright preemption of
ROP claims by amending Section 301. In addition, if Congress enacts any new protections for ROP at the
federal level, it may specify under what circumstances copyright would preempt such protections.
ROP laws can protect commercial interests in live performances, which cannot be copyrighted unless they
are “fixed” (e.g., filmed). In the Supreme Court’s only ROP case to date, for instance, a performer sued a
television company for broadcasting his “human cannonball” act, undermining ticket sales for the act. The
Supreme Court held that the First Amendment did not prevent the performer from asserting a ROP claim
against the company. As an exception to the rule that live performances have no copyright protection, in
1994 Congress provided criminal and civil liability for recording and distributing live music
performances without permission, although some courts have questioned these laws’ constitutionality.