The Supreme Court has held that “officers of the State ... performing official duties,” including public 
safety officials, act “under color of ... law” for purposes of Section 242. As DOJ has explained, law 
enforcement officers may violate Section 242 through “excessive force, sexual assault, intentional false 
arrests, theft, or the intentional fabrication of evidence resulting in a loss of liberty to another.” DOJ 
enforces Sections 241 and 242 by bringing criminal charges against officers accused of violating those 
statutes. People who believe their rights have been infringed may report such violations to DOJ, but 
Sections 241 and 242 do not authorize suits by individuals. If DOJ elects to pursue criminal charges under 
Section 241 or 242, it faces a high standard of proof. Under the cases Screws v. United States and United 
States v. Guest, the prosecution must prove the defendant had “a specific intent to deprive a person of a 
federal right made definite by decision or other rule of law.” Specific intent means that the defendant must 
not intend only to, for example, assault a victim but must also intend to violate a federal right by doing so. 
This results in what some view as a significant hurdle to bringing Section 241 and 242 claims.
DOJ brought charges under Section 242 against the officers involved in the deaths of George Floyd and 
Breonna Taylor. The officers involved in Mr. Floyd’s killing pled guilty or were convicted by a jury. As of 
February 2023, charges against the officers involved in Ms. Taylor’s death remain pending.
DOJ Civil Enforcement
Another section of the U.S. Code, 34 U.S.C. § 12601 (Section 12601, formerly codified at 42 U.S.C. 
§ 14141) renders it “unlawful for any governmental authority, or any agent thereof, ... to engage in a 
pattern or practice of conduct by law enforcement officers or by officials ... that deprives persons of 
rights, privileges, or immunities secured or protected by the Constitution or laws of the United States.”
Another CRS Legal Sidebar discusses this statute in more detail. According to DOJ, potential violations
of the provision include “excessive force, discriminatory harassment, false arrests, coercive sexual 
conduct, and unlawful stops, searches or arrests.” DOJ enforces the provision by filing civil complaints 
against allegedly offending law enforcement agencies. The statute does not create a private right for 
individuals harmed by violations to sue. Moreover, because the law applies only to a “pattern or practice 
of conduct,” it cannot remedy isolated instances of misconduct. Finally, the statute does not provide for 
monetary penalties. If DOJ successfully sues under the provision, it may “obtain appropriate equitable 
and declaratory relief to eliminate the pattern or practice.”
Private Civil Rights Litigation
Federal law also allows individuals to seek civil redress for violations of their legal rights. The applicable 
statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (Section 1983), provides in relevant part:
Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State 
. . . subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person within the 
jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the 
Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured[.]
Unlike the other statutory provisions discussed above, Section 1983 creates a private right of action, 
meaning that anyone suffering a covered deprivation of rights may sue the persons responsible. Moreover, 
unlike Sections 241 and 242, courts have interpreted Section 1983 not to contain a specific intent 
requirement, making it easier for plaintiffs to prove violations of the statute.