**How I'd Invest $250,000 Cash Today**

Usually, I have between $50,000 – $100,000 in my main bank account. But at one point, I accumulated over $250,000 mainly due to a $122,000 private real estate investment windfall.

In addition to accumulating cash, I also dollar-cost averaged in the S&P 500 on the way down in 2022 and way up in 2023. I also dollar-cost averaged in Sunbelt real estate, which struggled in 2023 due to high mortgage rates. These purchases were usually in $1,000 – $5,000 increments.

After building a larger-than-normal cash balance, here's how I'd deploy it in today's market. I'm constantly updating this post as conditions change, so book mark it if interested. If you have less than $250,000, that’s fine too. I share the percentages of where I will allocate my money.

Background Info To Understand Our Investment Process
I'm 46 and my wife is 42. Our kids our 6 and 4.

We consider ourselves moderately conservative investors since we haven't had regular day job income since 2012 for me and 2015 for my wife.

We fear having to go back to work full-time, not because of work itself but because we fear losing our freedom to spend time with our young children. As a result, we are unwilling to take too much investment risk until both attend school full-time in fall 2024.

Although we don't have day jobs, we do generate passive investment income to cover most of our living expenses. This is our definition of financial independence.

We also generate online income, which we usually reinvest to generate more passive income. Therefore, our cash pile will continue to build if we don't spend or invest all the money.

Our children's educational expenses are on track after we superfunded two 529 plans when they were born. We also have life insurance and estate planning set up. The only foreseeable big ticket item coming up is a car in 2029.

Here's how we'd invest $250,000 cash in today's market. This is what we did and are doing with our own cash. This is not investment advice for you as everybody's financial goals, risk tolerance, and situation are different.

Please always do your own due diligence before making any investment. Your investment decisions are yours alone.

1) Treasury Bonds (50% Of Cash Holding)
Only about 3% of our net worth is in bonds, mostly individual muni bonds we plan to hold until maturity. Our target annual net worth growth rate is between 5% to 10% a year, depending on economic conditions. As a result, being able to earn 5% on a Treasury bond is enticing.

The 10-year yield is currently at ~4.2% and Fed Chair Jerome Powell has hinted at Fed rate cuts starting in mid-2024. Investors can get up to around 5% for a one-year Treasury bond.

Although locking in a 4% – 5% return won't make us rich, it will provide us peace of mind. We also already feel rich, so making more money won't make us feel richer. Our focus is on optimizing our freedom and time.

Below is a recent bond yield table for all the various types of bonds you can buy, by duration. Risk-free Treasury bills and CDs look attractive. If you're in the highest marginal income tax bracket, municipal bonds look good too. Notice how the Treasury bond yield curve is still inverted.

Now that we've deployed 50% of our cash in Treasury bonds, the remaining 49.9% of our cash will be invested in risk assets.

2) Stocks (15% Of Cash Holdings)
Roughly 15% of our net worth is in stocks after paying cash for a new house in 4Q2023. The range has fluctuated between 20% – 35% since I left work in 2012. Since I started working in equities in 1999, I've done my best to diversify away from stocks and into hard assets.

My career and pay were already leveraged to the stock market. And I saw so many great fortunes made and lost during my time in the industry. When I left work, I continued my preference of investing mostly in real estate.

We almost always front-loaded our stock purchases for the year through our kids' Roth IRAs, custodial accounts, SEP IRAs, and 529 plans. For over 23 years, we've always front-loaded our tax-advantaged accounts at the beginning of the year to get them out of the way.

Most of the time it works out, some of the time it doesn't, like in 2022. That's market timing for you. But we got to front-load our tax-advantaged investments again in 2023, which has worked out great. Keep on investing consistently!

In addition to maxing out all our tax-advantaged accounts, we've been regular contributors to our taxable online brokerage accounts. After all, in order to retire early, you need a much larger taxable investment portfolio to live off its income.

When it comes to stocks, it's important to invest for specific purposes. If you do, you will be much more motivated to save and invest since stocks provide no utility or joy.

Stocks Seem Fully Valued Now
Here are the 2024 Wall Street S&P 500 forecasts with an average year-end price target of about 4,850. In other words, there’s now downside at these levels for 2024 if the average prediction comes true. Although, some strategists are forecasting 5,100-5,500 for the year.

Given the situation, I'm just buying in $1,000 – $5,000 tranches after every 1% decline. The huge year-end rally in stocks has pulled forward the expected performance in 2024.

Here is a post that provides a framework for your stock allocation by bond yield. The higher risk-free bond yields go, the lower your stock allocation is recommended to be and vice versa.

If I was in my 20s and 30s, I would allocate 50% of my cash to buying stocks instead. The remaining 20% would go to online real estate as the sector rebounds, 20% to venture capital, and only 10% would go to Treasuries and education. Remember, every investment is based off an individual's personal financial situation and goals.

3) Venture Capital (15% Of Cash Holding)
I enjoy investing in private funds because they are long-term investments with no day-to-day price updates. As a result, these investments cause little stress and are easy to forget about. Private investing forces you to invest for the long run.

I've already made capital commitments to a couple venture capital funds from Kleiner Perkins, Burst Capital, and Structural Capital (venture debt). As a result, I will just keep contributing to these funds whenever there are capital calls.

Venture capital is likely going to roar back in 2024 given private company valuations took a hit since 2022. Capital often rotates toward the biggest underperforming asset classes.

Investing In Artificial Intelligence
I'm most excited about investing in artificial intelligence, one of the biggest investment opportunities over the next decade. My Kleiner Perkins funds are actively making AI investments. But these funds are invite only with $100,000+ minimums.

The Fundrise Innovation Fund, on the other hand, is open to all with a $10 minimum investment. The fund invests in AI companies such as Databricks and Canva. Both are incredible companies and I look forward to the fund getting into more promising AI deals.

20 years from now, I don't want my kids asking me why I didn't invest in AI or work in AI given I had a chance to near the beginning. By investing in funds that invest in AI, at least I'll be able to benefit if I can't get a job in AI.

Here's an hour-long discussion I have with Ben Miller, CEO of Fundrise, about AI and investing in growth companies. Roughly 35% of the Innovation Fund is invested in AI companies.

4) Real Estate (20% Of Cash Holding)
I’m bullish on real estate in 2024 as the sector plays catch-up to stocks. With mortgage rates coming down, demand is going to rebound. As a result, I’m actively buying real estate funds today.

Real estate is my favorite asset class to build wealth. It provides shelter, generates income, and is less volatile. Unlike with some stocks, real estate values just don't decline by massive amounts overnight due to some small earnings miss. Real estate accounts for about 50% of our net worth.

No matter what happens to the value of our current forever home we bought in 2020, I'm thankful it has been able to keep my family safe and loved during the pandemic. When it comes to buying a primary residence, it's lifestyle first, investment returns a distant second.