What is the Best Time to Buy Cryptocurrency?
 

 It’s traded 24 hours a day, 7 days a week by investors located all around the world. Cryptocurrency is a volatile market that can offer opportunities to make - or lose - significant sums of money
 

 What is the Best Time to Buy Cryptocurrency?
 

 There are many methods that equity investors use to decide when to execute a trade in the stock markets, but the same rules and trading patterns don’t always apply to cryptocurrency. It’s true that cryptocurrency buyers can make purchases within certain windows to get the best possible price. Still, the volatility of the cryptocurrency market makes it very difficult to identify reliable patterns and choose positions accordingly.
 

 Unlike other assets, trading cryptocurrency has very low barriers to entry with tokens with a range of values. Rising inflation has also caused many to invest as a way to increase ancillary income. The allure of potentially turning a small investment into millions has also led others to try their luck with digital assets. Lastly, the constant hype around cryptocurrencies has caused even some crypto skeptics to look more closely out of FOMO (the Fear Of Missing Out).
 

 Buying cryptocurrency requires individuals to use a crypto wallet that can interact with the blockchain that tracks cryptocurrencies. The easiest way to do this is through an online cryptocurrency exchange platform. There are many to choose from, but exchange fees can vary widely. Make sure to take all fees into account before you buy cryptocurrency.
 

 Additionally, the transaction costs to record your transaction to the distributed ledger that is the blockchain can also vary due to the demand on computing power, energy, or volume of transactions that can impact your bottom line.
 

 However, with the volatility in trading cryptocurrency, those who want to start investing in cryptocurrency often wonder when is the best time to buy cryptocurrency?
 

 Key Highlights
 

 Many investors, some less experienced than others, are buying cryptocurrencies due to the hype, “fear-of-missing-out,” and low barrier to entry.
 

 Choosing the right positions can make or break an investment strategy, and the volatility of cryptocurrency makes it difficult to identify patterns and investment triggers.
 

 There are certain times that are better for trading cryptocurrency than others, but ultimately the best time to buy crypto is when the buyer is feeling confident in their strategy and financially ready to make a move.
 

 Best Time of the Day to Buy Cryptocurrency
 

 One of the perks of trading cryptocurrency is that you can buy it whenever you want. But many investors buy and sell cryptocurrencies during the same hours that the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) is open. But since you can buy and sell crypto at all hours of the day, you’ll need to know which hours are better for buying cryptocurrency.
 

 Through analyzing months of data, you’ll begin to notice daily trends. Paying attention to cryptocurrencies with higher market capitalizations like Bitcoin, Ether, and Solana can also help newer investors determine better times of day to trade since cryptocurrency prices tend to rise and fall together.
 

 Experts say the best time of day to buy cryptocurrency is early in the morning before the NYSE opens since values tend to rise as the day goes on. Be sure to pay attention to slight daily fluctuations across different cryptocurrencies since trends will vary from coin to coin.
 

 Best Time of the Week to Buy Cryptocurrency
 

 Now that you’re getting used to setting your alarm bright and early to watch cryptocurrency trends, you may begin to notice longer patterns from week to week.
 

 Prices are lower when the market is less busy. Although you can trade cryptocurrencies at any time of day, the market is more active during typical work hours and less active early in the morning, at night, and on the weekends.
 

 Generally, cryptocurrency prices start low on Monday and rise throughout the week. When the weekend hits, prices tend to drop until market activity begins the following Monday. Since prices are likely to be at their lowest point following a weekend of low trading activity, Monday is the best time of the week to buy cryptocurrency.
 

 Best Time of the Month to Buy Cryptocurrency
 

 Pricing trends carry on as weeks turn into months, and new trading patterns emerge that raise and lower the price of various cryptocurrencies over time. Since crypto trends are constantly in flux, deciding the best time of the month to buy cryptocurrency will require patience as you get to know the pricing trends of your favorite coins.
 

 For now, the best time to buy cryptocurrency is toward the end of the month. Cryptocurrency prices tend to rise in the first weeks of the month before they collapse and continue to trend downward through the end of the month.
 

 It’s worth reiterating again that cryptocurrencies are notorious for their volatility, which means patterns and trends that are true one month can vary widely the next. It takes time and diligence to learn how to follow cryptocurrency values and market fluctuations.
 

 How to Time the Cryptocurrency Market
 

 Here’s a quick recap to help you learn how to time the cryptocurrency market and get the best possible prices:
 

 Cryptocurrencies are most active during the work week, with prices starting low on Monday morning and steadily rising until they drop over the weekend.
 

 Pay attention to stock market trading hours as they have an effect on cryptocurrency trading, even though you can buy and sell cryptocurrencies 24/7.
 

 Be aware of your risk tolerance by forecasting your cash flow and watching cryptocurrency market trends.
 

 The Best Time to Buy Cryptocurrency
 

 It can be difficult to time the cryptocurrency market due to its volatile nature, but there are times that are better for buying cryptocurrencies than others.
 

 Just as with any other investment, cryptocurrency buyers should be aware of their risk tolerance and market conditions. But some trading strategies that work well on the stock exchange may not translate into profits for cryptocurrency trades.
 

 The best time to buy cryptocurrency is whenever you’re ready to start investing. Don’t put more into your investment than you are willing to lose, and keep in mind the rule of dollar-cost averaging. Once you’ve decided on a position, use this guide to decide when the best time to enter the cryptocurrency market is for you.