In 2014, the government for the first time 
 started to trade infrastructure bonds (GoZ, 
 2014b). The introduction of the 5-year tenor 
 infrastructure bonds at a fixed interest of 9.5 
 percent, has not only enhanced financial 
 deepening in the economy but also 
 contributed to a paradigm shift in the 
 structure of government debt. Also, the 
 introduction of long term debt instruments 
 by the government was intended at 
 minimising rollover risk and lessen 
 borrowing expenses associated with short 
 term debt (Infrastructure Development Bank 
 of Zimbabwe “IDBZ”, 2016). Until now, the 
 government has raised US$5 million, $15 
 million and $22 million in 2015, 2016 and 
 2017, respectively, through the trading of 
 infrastructure bonds on the capital markets 
 (IDBZ, 2015, 2016; GoZ, 2017). At present, 
 the government debt securities are being 
 traded on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange in 
 the same manner as other stocks. 
 To provide for the management of public 
 debt in Zimbabwe on a statutory basis, 
 mainly foreign public debt, the public debt 
 reforms included public sector financial 
 reforms and the institutionalisation and 
 operationalisation of a Debt Management 
 Office, which is currently housed in the 
 Ministry of Finance and Economic 
 Development. The responsibilities of the 
 Debt Office are among others, to ensure 
 public debt database validation and 
 reconciliation with all creditors and to 
 provide for the raising, management and 
 servicing of loans by the state (GoZ, 2015b). 
 The Public Management Act Amended 
 (2015) further stipulates that the Debt Office 
 shall (1) formulate and publish a Medium 
 Term Debt Management Strategy, (2) 
 formulate and publish an annual borrowing 
 plan, which includes a borrowing limit, and 
 (3) undertake an annual debt sustainability 
 analyses (MOFED, 2012).  
 In 2011, the GNU instituted several foreign 
 policy shifts, intended at reducing the 
 country’s foreign public debt overhang, by 
 re-engaging with creditors and the global 
 community. The intention of the new re
 engagement policy reform was to seek 
 comprehensive debt relief initiatives, as well 
 as opening up new lines of offshore 
 financing. Accordingly, in 2011, the 
 government started to make paltry debt 
 payments to the Bretton Woods institutions 
 and the African Development Bank, an 
 initiative that was aimed at seeking debt 
 rescheduling (RBZ, 2014). To spearhead the 
 re-engagement process, the government 
 formulated the Accelerated Re-engagement 
 Economic Programme (ZAREP). More so, 
 the formulation of ZAREP was meant to 
 promote fiscal sustainability through proper 
 expenditure management, monitoring and 
 wage policy reviews (GoZ, 2015c: 14). The 
 emergence of Staff Monitored Programme 
 (SMP)
  between
  the
  Zimbabwean 
 government and the International Monetary 
 Fund in 2013 is an indication of the success 
 of the re-engagement policy with its 
 traditional creditors (IMF, 2015). The Staff 
 Monitored Programme focuses on putting 
 public finances on a sustainable course, 
 enhancing public financial management, 
 facilitating diamond revenue transparency, 
 and restructuring the central bank (IMF, 
 2013).  
 In related institutional and revenue structural 
 reforms, the government in 2015 managed to 
 amalgamate all diamond companies into one, 
 under the name Zimbabwe Consolidated 
 Diamond Corporation (ZCDC) (Parliament 
 of Zimbabwe, 2017: 12). The Zimbabwe 
 Consolidated Diamond Corporation came as 
 result of the IMF’s recommendations to 
 improve on diamond revenue transparency 
 and accountability (