**The Holiday Dip**
According to the National Retail Federation, it is
not uncommon for retailers to bring in 20-40% of
their annual sales during the weeks leading up
to Christmas. Key shopping days such as Cyber
Monday and Black Friday are so important that
even those outside the industry watch to see
what happens and
plan their shopping
around these days.
A unique challenge
for retail customer
service organizations
is dealing with this sudden and temporary
increase in volume of sales transactions while
maintaining customer satisfaction levels, all while
dealing with the reality of budget constraints.
To add to the
challenge of pure
volume faced during
the holiday season,
teams must deal with
customers that can
be more difficult than
usual. They are often more unpleasant because of
stress, make purchase decisions less thoughtfully,
and have less experience with retail processes
such as coupons and returns.
THE ”HOLIDAY DIP“
Ellen, the manager of a small customer service
team at a company selling personal hygiene
products, emphasized that the holiday rush is
about much more than pure volume for her team.
“Yes, we’re busy in Q4. But what is worse is the
customers are different. They are more stressed
and we have to up the
positive energy to calm
them down. But we can’t
take more time with
customers since they are
all just as busy as we are.
People are buying less thoughtfully so there are
more purchase regrets and returns that we have
to deal with.” Adam echoed this sentiment.
“During the holidays we find we get a large
number of customers that just aren’t shoppers.
They don’t know things that
we expect most people know
like finding the return label in
the box or using the coupon
before they pay.”
The Zendesk Benchmark has
tracked the impact of the holiday rush on customer
satisfaction. There is a clear trend: satisfaction
with customer service interactions measurably
and consistently drop during the holiday season.
 “Q4 is our busiest time of year, and every
parameter that impacts a successful
customer experience is strained.”
“During the holidays, customers don’t
understand how things work as well as our
typical customer. We have to spend more
time on education and misunderstandings
at a time when we’re busy anyway.”
Customer Service in the Retail Revolution 05
2011
81% 81% 81%
73%
79%
76%
2012 2013
Q3
Q4
The Zendesk analysis further drilled down into
the data to examine the cause of this “dip” in
satisfaction during the holiday season. They
found a clear correlation between the drop in
satisfaction and the number of tickets per
agent. As tickets per agent increased,
satisfaction decreased.
The retail customer service managers we
spoke with agreed that the Q4 satisfaction dip
is a significant issue. They frequently described
planning for the holiday rush as one of the most
strategic activities they do each year. Pelle, the
director of customer service for a company
selling fashion accessories, had just finished
his annual performance review when we spoke.
“If I look back at last year, my biggest strategic
mistake was my Q4 forecast. I got it wrong and
my team wasn’t ready. We’re already making
changes to do better this year.”
Pelle’s approach for the coming holiday season
included an investment in a customer service
platform that will enable more self-service
capabilities and streamline workflow so each
agent can handle more tickets. This option was
a good choice since he had time to implement
and test the systems and train his agents well
before the Q4 rush started.
Lucia took a different approach to dealing with
the holiday customer service rush. She brought
on an outsourcing partner for the holiday season.
This was a good option for her company, which
sells non-perishable food items, as agents do
not require additional product expertise. Their
company has used this approach for several
years, and each time they optimize the way
they work together to create a more seamless
experience. “We have a great outsourcing
Customer Service in the Retail Revolution 06
partner, and having them deal with basic issues
like shipping, let us focus on the things that
are unique to our business. However, when we
first started working together we operated too
independently. Tickets that were escalated from
the outsourcer to us created a real speed-bump
for the customers as they were passed up the
chain. We invested in a service platform that
allowed us to buy temporary licenses for the
outsourcer so we are all on the same system all
the time. That eliminated that problem, plus gave
us greater insight into what was going on with the
outsourcer. For example, we were able to identify
a quality problem with one outsourcing agent
that was just not the kind of person we wanted
representing our company.”
Clay, director of call center operations at a
furniture and appliance chain based in Australia,
chose to hire additional permanent staff for
the holiday season. While this was the most
expensive option available, his company’s large
ticket items made a focus on personal contact
very important and made this the best option.
Claire, who works for a Scandinavian electronics
retailer, deals with the Q4 rush by temporarily
assigning responsibilities of staff outside of
the regular customer service team. “During
the holiday season, nothing is as important as
ensuring sales are made. From our CEO to the
teenager who cleans the kitchen, we were all
working the service queue last December. I know
this wouldn’t work everywhere. We have a small
company with people who are willing to pitch in
and do whatever it takes. We are very careful
to have procedures and training in place so we
don’t end up creating more work cleaning up
mistakes made by employees who usually aren’t
customer facing.”
Clearly, there is no single “right way” for retailers
preparing for the holiday rush. What is never an
option is to simply hope that existing resources
can manage when activity increases dramatically.
However, there are two important strategies that
work well for all customer service managers:
Be ready early:
Experienced managers who have been
through many holiday seasons consistently
recommend having all additional resources
in place one month before the rush starts.
This gives the opportunity to have everyone
trained, all processes in place, and all hiccups
ironed out before the real rush begins and it
becomes complicated to make changes.
Use data to influence management:
Customer service teams who have been
through a bad year usually have an easier
time convincing their management to invest
in resources for the next year. Using data
from prior years, such as ticket volumes and
customer satisfaction trends, combined with
resources like the Zendesk Benchmark can
be very influential in having management
approve customer service investments for Q4.