A core factor in fueling the widespread adoption of analytics in sports is
the integration of technology. Although it is fairly straightforward to track
all the action in a computer game, as they are ultimately mediated by lines
of code and actions within the video game can be dumped into spreadsheets and databases for analysis, sports happen within a framework where
the data must be collected before it can be assessed. In line with James’s
early concerns about the poor state of play-by-play data in baseball, major
sports leagues have invested greatly in the integration of technology to
assess players and how they interact in games. Baseball pitches are tracked
and the results compared with the strike zone to rate umpires. A company called Second Spectrum uses technology originally designed to track missiles to map how players move on basketball courts and soccer pitches,
enabling comparative analysis about how players defend, run, and generally play the game. Catapult developed a wearable system that tracks how
players stress their bodies during practice and games, aiding the ability to
determine when players need a rest and when they are likely at the peak of
their ability to perform.
Technology has also become a means by which players, teams, and analysts can “directly engage in an active exploration to understand why and
how such information may have emerged.”2
 The combination of technologies to track sports makes them a bit more like a video game, where every
data point is ready to be pulled into analysis. Increasing the data available to analysts creates a feedback loop, where the data can increase understanding to lead to new questions and new technological development in
order to continue to refine the meta. Although there is likely to be a point
of diminishing returns for both the technology and the analysis, that point
will probably come when a sport is solved, which will make it far less interesting to watch and play. Baseball offers up an example of a sport that
stands as a largely solved game, as analytics are widely accepted and their
lessons frame strategy and play.
Along the road toward solving a sport, data analysis leads to insights that
change how certain teams play the game. When those teams overperform,
their tactics are copied, frequently changing how the game is played and
often upending decades of tradition in establishing a new “best” way to
play. In baseball this shows up in defensive shifts where instead of dividing
the field equally, defenders align themselves in a manner matched to where
the hitter typically strikes the ball. In basketball, the three-point revolution
took over as teams recognized that shots worth three points are expected to
generate more points than long two-pointers and basically every shot other
than those very close to the basket.3
 In soccer, pressing dominates as elite
teams noted that being able to win the ball high up the field makes them
more likely to score and renders the opposition less likely to get a shot off.
Football analytics found what Madden players had known for years, which
is that going for it more often on fourth down increases offensive production (and is generally more fun). Throughout these changes, there is a back and forth as analytics debuts
some new insight and established norms within the game resist. A strategy that is proven to be more effective in the long run does not take hold unless
a coach or manager makes it to the long run in the first place by not getting
fired. Short-run struggles, especially for those with novel approaches, can
quickly leads to questions from the media and fans, potentially ending a
career. For a new meta to really get established, it not only has to work, but
it has to do so fairly quickly, and then as it spreads, it can become the new
set of norms the next insight will have to overcome.