Demand-Pull Inflation
Inflation that is caused by an increase in aggregate demand (overall spending) absent a
proportional increase in aggregate supply (overall production) is known as demand-pull inflation.
When aggregate demand increases by more than its trend rate, typically the productive capacity
of the economy does not immediately adjust to meet higher demand, particularly if the economy
is at or near full employment.16 In response to the increased demand in the economy, producers
will attempt to increase the quantity of goods and services they provide. To increase production,
producers may attempt to hire more workers by increasing wages. Assuming producers are not
willing to eat into profits in order to ramp up production,17 they are likely to increase the prices of
their final goods and services to compensate themselves for the increase in wages (which
increases production costs), thereby creating inflation.18 Inflation can work to lower demand and
increase supply and thus can be the means to bring supply and demand back into equilibrium,
particularly in an overheating economy in which demand has risen above what the economy can
produce at full employment.19
Any number of factors could contribute to increases in aggregate demand, including the normal
ebbs and flows of the business cycle, consumer and investor sentiment, the value of the dollar,
and fiscal and monetary policy, among others. Expansionary fiscal policies include an increase in
the budget deficit by lowering taxes or increasing government spending or transfers to
individuals. Such policies work to increase overall spending in the economy by driving up
consumer demand, in the case of lower taxes, or both consumer demand and government
purchases in the case of increased spending. This in turn can lead to increased production and
decreasing unemployment levels. The downside to achieving these benefits through expansionary
fiscal policy is that it can result in demand-pull inflation in the short term, particularly if the
economy is at full employment. Expansionary fiscal policy is unlikely to cause sustained
inflation, as it typically involves temporary increases in spending. Such one-time increases may
produce similar one-time increases in inflation but would be likely to cause persistent increases in
inflation only if such policy were persistently applied. Additionally, monetary policy can
potentially be used to offset the inflationary effects of such policy.
Cost-Push Inflation
Inflation that is caused by a decrease in aggregate supply as a result of increases in the cost of
production absent a proportional decrease in aggregate demand is known as cost-push inflation.
An increase in the cost of raw materials or any of the factors of production—land, labor, capital,
entrepreneurship—will result in increased production costs.23 Assuming producers’ productivity
is at or near its maximum, producers will not be able to maintain existing profit margins in
response. Much the same as the demand-side issue, if producers cannot or will not accept lowered
profits, they will raise prices.24
The classic example of cost-push inflation is the result of a commodity price shock, which
sharply decreases the supply of a given commodity and increases its price. Certain commodities
are inputs in the production process, and as the price of an important input good increases, so
does the price of the final goods and services, resulting in inflation. Cost-push inflation,
especially when caused by a supply shock, tends to result in only a temporary increase in inflation
unless accommodated by monetary policy. Supply disruptions are often alleviated naturally, and
for inflation to be persistently high, supply shock after supply shock would need to occur.25
One of the reasons a commodity shock in particular is a widely cited example of something that
causes cost-push inflation is that demand for many commodities is considered to be inelastic. The
elasticity of demand refers to how consumers’ appetite for a good changes given the price it is
offered at.26 A completely inelastic good is one that consumers would purchase at the same rate
regardless of the price. For example, demand for oil and its derivative petroleum products—such
as gasoline, diesel fuel, and petrochemicals—is generally fairly inelastic, because they are
necessary purchases for consumers and businesses, with few substitutes readily available.
Another commonly cited example of cost-push inflation is caused by increases in the cost of
labor, often referred to as wage-push inflation. An increase in the federal minimum wage, for
example, could theoretically cause inflation. When producers need to pay their workers more,
they may opt to pass that cost along to the consumer, reduce profits to pay the increased cost, or
decrease the amount of workers they employ to keep costs down. The extent to which an increase
in wages affects the price level depends largely on how many workers are affected by the wage
increase and the size of the increase. In the case of the minimum wage, very few workers or very
many workers could be affected, depending on the level of increase. 