Context:
2. Game Day Procedures
a. Pregame Medical Team Meeting. Sixty (60) minutes prior to kickoff, all
medicalstaff will meet in the referees’ locker room. Expected personnel include:
Head Team Physician and Head Team Primary Care Sports Medicine Physician,
and Head Team ATC from each team and UNCs, both Booth ATC Spotters,
lead EMS paramedic for the field,referee, VTML, and the airway management
physician. The pregame medical meeting is to be led by the home team Head
Team Physician. Items to be covered include: introductions of medicalstaff;
location of the ambulance, transport cart,spine board, defibrillator, and advanced
airway equipment; review of EAP medical facilities; and location of x-ray
equipment. Medicalstaffshall confirm who is responsible for verifying a
concussion evaluation of an athlete, i.e., “closing the loop.” Booth ATC spotters
shall review the Medical Time-Out procedures with officials.
b. “No-Go” Signs and Symptoms. If a player exhibits or reports any of the
following signs or symptoms of concussion, he must be removed immediately
from the field of play and transported to the locker room. If a neutral sideline
observer or a member of the player’s Club’s medical team observes a player
exhibit or receives a report that a player has experienced any of the following
signs or symptoms, the player shall be considered to have suffered a concussion
and may not return to participation (practice or play) on the same day under
any circumstances:
i. Loss of Consciousness (including Impact Seizure and/or “fencing
posture”);
ii. Ataxia (abnormality of balance/stability, motor coordination, or 
 dysfunctional speech);
Amended As of October 8, 2022
iii. Confusion; or
iv. Amnesia
c. NFL Sideline Concussion Assessment (Sideline Survey)
If a player exhibits or reports a sign or symptom of concussion (defined above),
spinal cord neuropraxia or a concern is raised by the Club’s athletic trainer,Club
physicians, Booth ATC Spotter, coach, teammate, game official or sideline or
Booth UNCs(collectively referredto as “gameday medical personnel”)the player
must be immediately removed to the sideline orstabilized on the field, as needed,
the player’s helmet must be taken away from him, and the player must undergo
the entire NFL Sideline Concussion Assessment1 which, at a minimum, must
consist of the following:
i. A review of the “No-Go” criteria listed above (Loss of Consciousness
(including impact seizure and/or “fencing posture”), Ataxia,
Confusion, andAmnesia), which, if present, requires the player to be
brought to the lockerroom immediately and he shall not return to play;
ii. Inquiry regarding the history of the event, including before, during and 
after the suspected mechanism of injury;
iii. Review of concussion signs and symptoms (See, Section I (C and D));
iv. All Maddocks’ questions;
v. Complete Video Review of the injury (detailed below), including
discussion with theBooth UNC; and
vi. Focused Neurological Exam, inclusive of the following:
(A)Cervical Spine Examination (including range of motion and pain);
(B) Evaluation of speech;
(C) Testing of gait, coordination, and balance; and
 (D)Eye Movements and Pupillary Exam.
The foregoing shall be: (i) conducted inside the medical evaluation tent on the
Sideline (or in the Locker Room if the Club medical staff elects to conduct it in 
the Locker Room); (ii) performed using the tablet or other technology assigned 
by the NFL, and (iii) completion of each component of the Sideline Survey shall 
be confirmed using the same. If any elements of the sideline assessment are 
positive, inconclusive, or suspicious for the presence of a concussion, the player 
must be escorted to the locker room immediately for the complete NFL Locker 
Room Comprehensive Concussion Assessment. Also, if the player demonstrates
worsening or progressing symptoms at any point, he is to be brought to the 
1 The Club physician/sideline UNC unit will be co-located for all concussion evaluates and management both on and 
off the field. The sideline UNC may present his/her own questions or conduct additional testing and shall assist in the 
diagnosis and treatment of concussion.
Amended As of October 8, 2022
locker room for further evaluation including the complete NFL Locker Room
Comprehensive Concussion Assessment unless clinically contraindicated. Only 
medical personnel deemed essential to the care of the athlete may be present for 
the tent and/or locker room evaluation. This includes the team physician best 
qualified to evaluate concussion, the Club athletic trainer, and the sideline UNC. 
The sideline UNC may present his/her own questions or conduct additional
testing and shall not be prevented in from so doing.
If, upon completing the Sideline Survey, the Club physician, after consultation 
with the sideline UNC, concludes that the player did notsustain a concussion,
then the playermay return to play.
Bestpracticesfor concussion assessment include periodic checks of the player by
the Club physician, sideline UNC or other medical personnel to determine
whether he has developed any of the signs orsymptoms of concussion that would
necessitate a locker room evaluation.
UNC Involvement in Sideline Concussion Assessment:
1. The Club physician will consult in private with the members of his/her team’s
medical staff designated to identify, diagnose and treat potentially concussed 
players, the sideline UNC and, as necessary, the Club’s ATC, prior to making 
his/her decision regarding whether the player will return to the game.
2. If the Club physician determines that the player shall not return to play (based 
on the criteria listed in Section 2.a. above) and therefore there is no need to
complete the SidelineConcussionAssessment, the Club physician and the
sideline UNC shall accompany the player to the locker room to evaluate the
player using the NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion Evaluation
(see below). For more serious injury, the EAP will be activated, if indicated.
3. The Club physician remains responsible for all final decisions regarding 
Return-to-Play. However, the Club physician will consult with his/her sideline 
UNC team member prior to reaching his/her decision. If the sideline UNC 
disagrees with the Club physician’s decision to return the player to play or 
remove the athlete, the sideline UNC will be given an opportunity to explain 
the basis of his/her opinion. This will be discussed in a collegial fashion in
private as to why the player should or should not be returned to the game. The 
Club physician will communicate his or her final decision to the player.
Amended As of October 8, 2022
10
4. As soon as practical, following the evaluation, the individual designated at the 
Pregame Medical Team Meeting shall notify the booth medical personnel that 
an evaluation was conducted (“close the loop”).
 d. NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion Assessment
 (Locker Room Exam)
The NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion Assessment is the
standardized acute evaluation tool that has been developed by the NFL’s Head,
Neck and Spine Committee to be used by Clubs’ medical staffs and designated 
UNCs to evaluate potential concussions during practices and on game day (see
Attachment A). This evaluation is based on the Standardized Concussion
Assessment Tool (SCAT 5) published by the International Concussion in 
Sport Group (McCrory, et al., 2017), modified for use in the NFL (Attachment
A). The NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion Assessment can be used
to aid in the diagnosis of concussion even if there is a delayed onset of
symptoms. The ongoing use of the Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion
Assessment in conjunction with the preseason baseline and post-injury testing
provides detailed data regarding each athlete’s injury and recovery course.
Being able to compare the results from the NFL Locker Room Comprehensive
Concussion Assessment to the baseline information obtained in the preseason
improves the value of this instrument. Clubs shall maintain and upload to the
EMR all NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion Assessment exams
and a copy of the same shall be given to both the player and the team medical
staff.
In all circumstances, the Club physician responsible for concussion evaluation 
shall assess the player in conjunction with the sideline UNC. The Club physician 
shall be responsible for determining whether the player is diagnosed as having a 
concussion.
The athlete may have a concussion despite being able to complete the NFL
Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion Assessment “within normal
limits” compared to baseline, due to the potential limitations of the
Assessment. Such limitations underscore the importance of knowing the
athlete and the subtle deficits in their personality and behaviors that can
occur with concussive injury.
The signs and symptoms of concussion listed above (Section I, C and D),
although frequently observed or reported, are not an exhaustive list. The
NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion Assessment is intended to
capture these elements in a standardized format. The neurocognitive
assessment in the NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion
Assessment is brief and does not replace a more comprehensive
neurological evaluation or more formal neurocognitive testing. The
Amended As of October 8, 2022
11
modified Balance Error Scoring System (mBESS) is an important
component of the NFL Locker Room Comprehensive Concussion
Assessment and has been validated as a useful adjunct in assessing
concussive injury.