Introduction   The predominant acute presentations of COVID-19 are respiratory, but neurological manifestations have been recognized as an important component of the disease, even in cases without respiratory symptoms (2-5). The neurological manifestations associated with COVID-19 range from mild to critical, affect adults and children and can present both during and after acute COVID-19 infection. Reported neurological signs, symptoms or syndromes in the acute phase include headache, dizziness, impaired taste or smell, delirium, agitation, stroke, seizures, coma,  meningoencephalitis and Guillain-Barré syndrome (6, 7). Consequences in the post-acute phase are also emerging, as either persisting or newly developing signs and symptoms (post-COVID-19 condition); these include headache,  problems with smell or taste, cognitive impairment, confusion, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, sleep disturbances and neuropsychiatric symptoms (8, 9).   COVID-19 disproportionately affects people with pre-existing neurological disorders. Chronic neurological disorders were found to be independently associated with increased mortality in hospitalized COVID-19 patients (hazard ratio  [HR]: 2.13; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.38–3.28) (10). Individuals with pre-existing neurological conditions have been affected by disruptions to routine care, delayed care because of concerns about infectious risks and disruptions to supply chains for medicines and resultant stock-outs (11).   This scientific brief provides a comprehensive overview of the relationship between neurology and COVID-19 and   covers what is currently known about:  • the acute neurological manifestations of COVID-19  • the neurological sequelae associated with post-COVID-19 condition  • the risk of infection, severe illness and mortality from COVID-19 for people with pre-existing neurological  conditions  • the extent of disruptions to neurological services caused by the pandemic and mitigation strategies to address  these disruptions   • emerging evidence for neurological complications following COVID-19 vaccination.   The target audience for this document includes health care providers, researchers, policy-makers and other stakeholders  interested in the evidence relating to neurology and COVID-19. The aim is to increase awareness and recognition of the  associated neurological aspects of COVID-19 to improve care and mitigation responses, particularly in low-resource  settings.   Methods   This scientific brief is based on the evidence that emerged from systematic or rapid reviews and meta-analyses  commissioned by WHO (14);1 WHO pulse surveys (15); WHO’s rapid assessment on services for mental,  neurological and substance use (MNS) disorders (16) and other relevant publications. A commissioned rapid  review. (https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3907265); and Misra S, Kolappa K, Prasad M, Radhakrishnan D,  Thakur KT, Solomon T. et al. Frequency of neurological manifestations in COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis of  350 studies (https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.20.21255780v1)  1   Neurology and COVID-19: Scientific brief -2-  Review of the evidence   Acute neurological manifestations of COVID-19  To assess the types and frequencies of reported neurological manifestations associated with COVID-19, WHO assisted with a systematic review and meta-analysis involving data from 145 721 patients with acute COVID-19 infections derived from 350 case series (17). COVID-19 infection was confirmed by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) detection, high-throughput sequencing, SARS-CoV-2 viral culture in throat swab specimens,  SARS-CoV-2 antibody detection in blood samples or SARS-CoV-2 viral culture in throat swab specimens. Most patients  (n=129 786, 89%) included in the review were hospitalized.  A total of 23 acute neurological symptoms (Table 1) and 14 neurological diagnoses (Table 2) were reported in the literature. Up to one third (n=48 059) of COVID-19 patients experienced some type of neurological manifestation, and  1 in 50 developed a stroke. In COVID-19 patients aged over 60 years, the most frequent neurological manifestation was  acute confusion/delirium (pooled prevalence: 34%; 95% CI: 23–46%). For all ages, the likelihood of experiencing acute confusion/delirium, stroke, seizure and movement disorders increased  with increasing severity of COVID-19, but these associations were not statistically significant. Smell and taste  impairments were significantly associated with non-severe COVID-19 (odds ratio [OR]: 0.44; 95% CI: 0.28–0.68 and  OR: 0.62; 95% CI: 0.42–0.91, respectively). In COVID-19 patients aged over 60 years, the presence of any neurological  manifestations was associated with significantly increased mortality (OR: 1.80; 95% CI: 1.11–2.91). Limitations  The overall risk of bias was assessed as being low for most studies (n=296, 85%) but studies with higher risk of bias  yielded higher prevalence estimates. Also, for most outcomes the meta-analyses yielded a high degree of heterogeneity,  indicating substantial clinical or methodological diversity, which in some instances rendered the pooling of data  inappropriate.   There are gaps in the evidence for non-hospitalized patient cohorts because their data are rarely reported in the literature.  The evidence gaps have implications for incidence, prevalence, duration and severity. Similarly, the timing of the onset  of signs or symptoms is often not reported. Limitations in study design of included case series precluded the comparison  between acute neurological manifestations caused by COVID-19 and the incidence of such manifestations in the general  population. Finally, in the absence of well-designed cohort studies, there are insufficient data to definitively assert  causality between these symptoms and COVID-19.  Neurological sequelae associated with post-COVID-19 condition  Complications following acute viral illnesses are well described (18, 19). Soon after the advent of the COVID-19  pandemic, longitudinal cohort studies started to assess long-term sequelae of COVID-19, including neurological  manifestations. At the same time, patients began to connect with each other and report on prolonged symptoms of  COVID-19. In response, WHO commissioned a rapid review of 28 published population-based, cohort or case-control  studies2. The review established specific new-onset neurological symptoms, signs or diagnoses occurring after the acute  phase of COVID-19 that can be interpreted as complications of COVID-19; assessed specific neurological symptoms,  signs or diagnoses that persist after the acute phase of COVID-19; and determined factors associated with these post acute neurological manifestations.   Of the 28 studies, only two followed patients for up to 6 months. Pooling of information was not possible for  methodological reasons. In a retrospective cohort of 1733 COVID-19 patients discharged from hospital, 19.6% (n=340)  reported neurological manifestations after a median follow-up of 186 days (9). The complaints most commonly reported  were fatigue or muscle weakness (63%; 1038/1655) and sleep difficulties (26%; 437/1655). Anxiety and depression  were reported by 23% (367/1617) of patients and difficulty walking by 24% (103/423). The second prospective study  followed 61 hospitalized COVID-19 patients with and without history of admission to an intensive care unit (ICU) (20).  2 Beghi E, Giussani G, Westenberg E, Allegri R, Garcia-Azorin D, Guekht A, Acute and Post-Acute Neurological Manifestations of  COVID-19: Present findings, critical appraisal, and future directions. Manuscript in preparation, 2021.  Neurology and COVID-19: Scientific brief  Common complaints at discharge  included  amnestic dysfunction (30%; 18/61), dysexecutive syndrome (33%; 20/61),  ataxia (11%, 7/61),  and tetraparesis (18%; 11/61) (20).   Limitations  The evidence for long-term or newly emerging neurological complications after COVID-19 is limited, particularly in  asymptomatic or non-hospitalized patients. Similarly, little is known about neurological sequelae in paediatric patients  with conditions related to COVID-19, including multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C). Data from low- and  middle-income countries are scarce, particularly in the post-acute phase. This has led to underreporting of neurological  findings in the context of COVID-19 with reference to geography, ethnicity and sociocultural environment.   Methodological issues and study design flaws further reduce the strength of the current evidence because some studies  have included in the control group asymptomatic patients who were not screened with molecular or serological tests to  confirm or exclude SARS-CoV-2 infection. Screening methods and diagnostic protocols vary across studies, depending  on the background of the local investigators, the diagnostic approach, the number and type of contacts during follow-up  and, not least, attrition and patient compliance. In addition, studies were done under surge conditions, which led to  incomplete diagnostic assessment.   The current understanding of neurological sequelae associated with post-COVID-19 condition is based mainly on patient  reports; clinically relevant manifestations; and greater attention towards symptoms, signs and diseases that have been  illustrated in previous reports By contrast, information is  limited on signs that can be documented only through testing,  imaging or biochemical or pathological investigations.   Pre-existing neurological conditions and COVID-19  A range of pre-existing noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) are associated with an increased risk of severe outcomes in  COVID-19 (21). These include several neurological conditions such as stroke and dementia. People with certain pre existing neurological conditions are more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection, experience exacerbations of their pre existing disease (22) and have higher risks of severe outcomes and death (10, 23). To synthesize the growing evidence  on this topic, WHO commissioned a rapid review of 26 articles from 12 countries across three continents, with a total  of 379 947 COVID-19 patients, to establish the risk of infection, severe illness and mortality from COVID-19 for people  with pre-existing neurological conditions.3   The rapid review found that certain pre-existing neurological diseases are associated with severity of COVID-19.4 The  most prevalent were cerebrovascular disease and dementia/neurodegenerative diseases (pooled OR: 1.99; 95% CI: 1.81 2.18). Mortality was high among people with pre-existing neurological conditions (pooled OR: 1.74; 95% CI: 1.56 1.94).   Limitations   Risk of bias was deemed high for most articles, and the overall quality of studies using GRADE (Grading of  Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluations) methodology was low; hence, the value of the current  evidence is limited. Most studies on the relationship between SARS-CoV-2 and pre-existing neurological conditions are  based on retrospective cohorts or case series, with few data from prospective studies. Future research will benefit greatly  from the use of standardized definitions and reporting for comorbidities, neurological symptoms or diagnoses. Use of  standardized case report forms – such as those published by WHO (25, 26) – can also contribute to the accuracy and  reliability of data.   Disruptions to essential neurological services caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and mitigation strategies  Interruption of routine treatment and care, as well as supply chains for medications during the COVID-19 pandemic,  present significant challenges for people with neurological conditions (11). According to the latest WHO Pulse survey  on continuity of essential health services during the COVID-19 pandemic (27), 45% of 121 countries for which  information was available still reported disruptions to services for MNS disorders in the first quarter of 2021. Likewise,  3Chomba M, Schiess N, Seeher K, Akpalu A, Baila J, Boruah AP et al. Pre-existing neurological conditions and COVID-19 risk. A  commissioned rapid review. (https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3907265)  4Ibid.  -4-  Neurology and COVID-19: Scientific brief  disruptions to rehabilitation services, a crucial aspect of neurological care, continue to be reported by 53% (of 89  countries). With respect to neurology-specific services, WHO’s rapid assessment of services for MNS disorders during  the COVID-19 pandemic in mid-2020 (16) revealed that one in three of 98 countries closed down neurology inpatient  units at least partly during the pandemic. Regarding service provision, surgeries for neurological disorders were  disrupted in two-thirds of 130 countries for which information was available, and the management of emergency  conditions such as status epilepticus was at least partially disrupted in 35% of the same 130 countries.   To better understand the extent of service disruption, its causes and mitigation strategies for neurological disorders in  the context of COVID-19, WHO commissioned a rapid review of 369 articles, providing data on 210 419 patients from  105 countries (14).   Studies that investigated the extent of service disruption (n=188) described it as mild (n=40, 21%), moderate (n=131,  70%) or severe (n=10, 5%). The most frequently described reasons for service disruption across 240 studies were travel  restrictions related to lockdown (n=196, 82%), closure of services or consultations as per health authority directive  (n=157, 65%) and reduced outpatient volume due to patients not presenting (n=135, 56%). A total of 224 studies  reported on mitigation strategies, with the most frequently reported strategies being telemedicine and other  teleconsultation formats (n=184, 82%), novel dispensing approaches for medicines (n=116, 52%) and redirection of  patients (n=95, 42%).   Limitations  To date, most of the data on service disruption have been derived from high- and middle-income countries, with  information from low-income countries lacking. Similarly, evidence of the effectiveness and acceptability of mitigation  strategies to patients remains limited. In addition, the current published literature seems biased towards certain settings  or types of services (e.g. outpatient, emergency or inpatient care). There are few reports on other areas that are crucial  for treating people with chronic neurological conditions (e.g. neurorehabilitation). Going forward, more systematic  evaluations and reporting of disruption of the whole spectrum of neurological services can provide a more  comprehensive picture.   Neurological complications following COVID-19 vaccination  There is a low risk following COVID-19 vaccination of neurological complications including Bell’s palsy (28),  cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) and possibly Guillain-Barré syndrome (29). However, the risk of such  complications is substantially lower than the risks associated with infection with SARS-CoV-2 (30, 31). Since March  2021, cases of thromboses associated with thrombocytopenia have been reported in patients vaccinated with the  Oxford-AstraZeneca ChAdOx1-S and Johnson & Johnson (J&J) Janssen Ad26.COV2.S COVID-19 vaccines.  Evaluation of the cases by national and international bodies concluded that there was a plausible causal link between  these two adenovirus-vectored vaccines and CVST (32-34), based on the temporal association with vaccination and an  increased incidence when compared with expected baseline rates of CVST (35-42). WHO has provided guidance for  clinical case management of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS) following vaccination against  COVID-19 (43).  Overall knowledge gaps  Current evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 can affect the nervous system. Multiple and probably overlapping  mechanisms have been proposed for the neurological manifestations; they include hypoxia, cytokine storm, post infectious autoimmune responses, hypercoagulability, neurologic complications of severe systemic illness and potential  direct neurotropism. Questions remain regarding the characteristics, timing and severity of neurological manifestations  of COVID-19, including the pathophysiological mechanisms through which SARS-CoV-2 affects the nervous system.  As more data emerge, associations of specific neurological disorders with COVID-19 will be further clarified – as has  been seen, for example, with Guillain-Barré syndrome (29). Prospective data, as well as biomarker and  neuropathological studies, are needed on the short- and long-term neurological sequelae.  Existing reports on the association between COVID-19 and most neurological manifestations are flawed by selection  and information bias, and available data reflect the spectrum of neurological manifestations in patients with the more  severe COVID-19 cases. Neurological signs or symptoms occurring during the acute phase of COVID-19 infection  cannot easily be disentangled from those with onset in the post-acute phase, and follow-up data are scarce, particularly  for subclinical findings such as cognitive impairment. -5-  Neurology and COVID-19: Scientific brief  Other gaps in the literature include a lack of clarity on the interplay between pre-existing neurological disease and other  underlying comorbidities such as hypertension and diabetes. Studies in this area were hospital-based and biased to  people with more severe symptoms, making the findings difficult to generalize to people based in the community or  having only mild symptoms. Understanding the impact of neurological conditions requires the inclusion of diverse  populations from a variety of social backgrounds.   Guidance is also needed for studies evaluating the disruption or the efficacy of mitigation strategies for care. Efforts  should be made to harmonize the methods in this area of research and to enhance the comparability between studies and  over time. In addition, funding for and progress in neurological research and training have been affected by the pandemic,  owing to the temporary suspension of research projects or postponement or cancellation of fellowships, which need to  be re-established as soon as possible (44).  Implications for further research  Well-designed case–control and cohort studies are needed to understand which patients are most vulnerable to  neurological manifestations in the acute and post COVID-19 condition and to understand causality related to COVID 19. Series of patients with neurological conditions need to be compared to patients without neurological conditions. Use  of case report forms (CRFs) such as WHO’s post-COVID-19 condition CRF (45) is encouraged to standardize data  collection. Future research directions should include more “bottom-up” evidence-gathering efforts; for example,  international surveys of neurological associations such as one recently undertaken by the European Federation of  Neurological Associations (EFNA) with support from members of the WHO Neurology and COVID-19 Global Forum  (46).  Conclusion   A wide spectrum of acute and post-acute neurological manifestations associated with COVID-19 have been reported  across the globe. Clinicians and health care workers should be aware of such presentations and complications even in  the absence of respiratory symptoms. Disruptions in access to essential neurological services and availability of essential  medications for people with pre-existing neurological conditions can be detrimental; hence, mitigation strategies such  as remote technology and telemedicine alternatives should be judiciously employed. The COVID-19 pandemic  continues to have an impact on neurological health, service delivery, research and training while widening existing  disparities worldwide. Recognizing and addressing these factors will provide opportunities to improve neurological care  worldwide.   Plans for updating   WHO continues to monitor the situation closely for any changes that may affect this scientific brief.