Scientists’ data practices
Participants across all the focus groups indicated having a DMP for at least one of their recent or current projects. Regarding data storage, some participants across four focus groups (atmosphere and earth science, chemistry, computer science, and neuroscience) used institutional repositories (IRs) for their data at some point within the data lifecycle, with five participants explicitly indicating use of IRs in their DMPs. The other popular choice discussed across four focus groups (atmospheric and earth science, computer science, ecology, and neuroscience) was proprietary cloud storage systems (e.g., DropBox, GitHub, and Google Drive). These users were concerned about file size limitations, costs, long-term preservation, data mining by the service providers, and the number of storage solutions becoming burdensome.

Desired repository features
Data traceability
Participants across four focus groups (atmosphere and earth science, chemistry, ecology, and neuroscience) mentioned wanting different kinds of information about how their data were being used to be tracked after data deposit in repositories. They wanted to know how many researchers view, cite, and publish based on the data they deposit. Additionally, participants wanted repositories to track any changes to their data post-deposit. For example, they suggested the creation of a path for updates to items in repositories after initial submission. They also wanted repositories to allow explicit versioning of their materials to clearly inform users of changes to materials over time. Relatedly, participants wanted repositories to provide notification systems for data depositors and users to know when new versions or derivative works based on their data become available as well as notifications for depositors about when their data has been viewed, cited, or included in a publication.

Metadata
Participants across three focus groups (atmospheric and earth science, chemistry, and neuroscience) discussed wanting high quality metadata within repositories. Some argued for automated metadata creation when uploading their data into repositories to save time and provide at least some level of description of their data (e.g., P1, P4, Chemistry). Within their own projects and in utilizing repositories, participants wanted help with metadata quality control issues. Participants within atmospheric and earth science who frequently created or interacted with complex files wanted expanded types of metadata (e.g., greater spatial metadata for geographic information system (GIS) data). Atmospheric and earth scientists, chemists, and neuroscientists wanted greater searchability and machine readability of data and entities within datasets housed in repositories, specifically to find a variable by multiple search parameters.

Data use restrictions
Participants across all five focus groups agreed that repositories need to clearly explain what a researcher can and cannot do with a dataset. For example, participants thought repositories should clearly state on every dataset whether researchers can: base new research on the data, publish based on the data, and use the data for business purposes. Participants stated current data restrictions can be confusing to those not acquainted with legal principles. For example, one data professional (P2, Chemistry) explained that researchers often mislabeled their datasets with ill-suited licenses. Participants commonly reported using Open Access or Creative Commons, but articulated the necessity of having the option for restrictive or proprietary licenses, although most had not used such licenses.

Some participants used embargoes and others never had. Most viewed embargoes as “a necessary evil,” provided that they are limited to approximately a few years after repository submission or until time of publication. Participants did not think it was fair to repository staff or potential data reusers to have any data embargoed in perpetuity.

Stable infrastructure
Participants across two focus groups (atmospheric and earth science, and chemistry) expressed concern about the long-term stability of their data in repositories. Some stated that their fear of a repository not being able to provide long-term preservation of their data led them to seek out and utilize alternative storage solutions. Others expected repositories to commit to the future of their data and have satisfactory funding structures to fulfill their stated missions. Participants described stable repository infrastructure in terms of updating data files (i.e., versioning) and formats over time and ensuring their usability.

Security
Participants across four focus groups (atmospheric and earth science, chemistry, computer science, and neuroscience) discussed wanting their data to be secure. They feared lax security could compromise their data. Specific to embargoed data, they feared lax security could enable “scooping” of research before data depositors are able to make use of the data through publication. Those handling data with confidential, sensitive or personally identifiable information expressed the most concern about potential security breaches because it could result in a breach and loss of trust with their current and future study participants, making it harder for themselves and future researchers to recruit study participants in the long-term, and it would result in noncompliance with mandates from their IRBs.