Future Possibilities of Big Tech in Finance
This report generally provides an overview of Big Tech’s current financial offerings, how the
existing regulatory framework applies to these operations, and related policy implications.
However, should Big Tech seek to expand its offerings, as its actions have sometimes suggested
and some observers have speculated, the relevant concerns may change considerably. At the same
time, regulatory treatment may change irrespective of Big Tech’s activities, as policymakers and
lawmakers continue to assess various Big Tech financial-services-related activities, such as data
practices, and potential antitrust issues. For policymakers concerned about the potential
implications of becoming dominant in financial markets, financial products where Big Tech could
expand is also relevant for current policy.
This section considers the potential evolution of financial services offered by Big Tech and the
attendant policy implications. While it considers possible alternatives and issues that may arise
from possible paths, the report does not assume that any one is more or less likely or that the
companies are considering pursuing any particular strategy.
Investment Advisory Services
Investment advisory services refer to professionals that provide advice on securities to investors
and include asset, portfolio, and wealth managers.156 More than 90% of wealth managers believe
Big Tech companies will enter the market, with greater than 50% expecting significant disruption
if it happens, according to a November 2021 survey.157 Over the past decade, fintechs have
entered the investment management area, using machine learning to offer services such as robo-
advising and retail stock trading. If Big Tech companies were to consider this approach, they
would have to register as investment advisors with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
They may also be required to register with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority if they
plan to offer brokerage services.
Insurance
According to one major management consulting firm, “[o]utside tech-powered giants … are
shaping the insurance market.”158 Both Amazon and Google have partnered with insurance
companies, much like they did banks, to offer various insurance products.159 Any intention to
push further without relying on a partner would invite regulation at the state level,160 where most of the regulation of insurance occurs:

The role of the federal government in regulating private insurance is relatively limited
compared with its role in banking and securities. Insurance companies, unlike banks and
securities firms, have been chartered and regulated solely by the states for the past 150
years. There are no federal regulators of insurance akin to those for securities or banks,
such as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency (OCC), respectively.161
Banking
There are few issues at the nexus of technology and finance that generate greater interest and
speculation than the prospect of Big Tech’s entry into banking. As it stands, some have pursued
nonbank lending. The “Plex” project (see “Google “Plex” textbox), which Google abandoned in
late 2021, was the most direct step to date by the industry, seeming to confirm collective and
long-held suspicions that Big Techs were interested in becoming banks. However, if any of the
companies were to consider an expansion into more bank-like activities, such as accepting
deposits, their only option would likely be to pursue an industrial loan company charter, which
has a complex framework and history.
Legislative Framework
Generally, U.S. law prohibits commercial enterprises (i.e., nonfinancial firms) from operating
banks. Since at least as far back as the Glass-Steagall Act (Sections 20, 21, 26, and 32 of the
Banking Act of 1933; P.L. 73-66), and then in the Bank Holding Company Act, Congress has
sought to separate banking enterprises that take deposits and make loans from commercial
enterprises producing and selling goods and services.162 In short, the separation aims to prevent
one company from both offering a product and the loan to purchase that product funded with
deposits publicly guaranteed by FDIC insurance.
One exception to this general separation of commerce and banking is the role of industrial loan
companies (ILCs). ILCs are financial institutions charted in six states163 that function much like
typical banks. Unlike other banks, ILCs can be owned by nonfinancial, commercial firms. Under
the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1841 (c)(2)(h)), ILCs, provided they meet certain
criteria, are exempt from the definition of bank. Pursuant to that exemption, a company that owns
a bank is not a bank holding company and as such is not subject to oversight by the Federal
Reserve. However, ILCs are considered state banks for the purposes of the FDIC Act (12 U.S.C.
1813 (a)(2)). Under that law, they are defined as banks and thus eligible for deposit insurance.
Thus, this patchwork legal framework creates the opportunity for a company with other
commercial interests to offer banking services, obtain deposit insurance, and operate nationally without being subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve System.

Relevant History
Historically, nonfinancial companies interested in a banking license have taken the ILC approach.
In the mid-2000s, both Walmart and Home Depot began unsuccessful attempts to establish or
acquire ILCs.165 Both ultimately dropped their attempts in the face of public opposition, after
which the FDIC imposed an official moratorium on considering new insurance applications from
ILCs between July 2006 and January 2008, and Section 603 of the Dodd-Frank Act imposed
another temporary statutory moratorium between July 2010 and July 2013. Though the official
moratoria had ended, the FDIC did not grant an ILC insurance application again until March
2020, when it approved two ILCs—Nelnet and Square166—for deposit insurance. Square offers
many of the same services as the Big Techs in this report, including mobile wallet with payment
and peer-to-peer transfer functions.167
Also relevant is an outstanding application for an ILC charter by Japanese e-commerce company
Rakuten. Rakuten filed its most recent ILC application on January 15, 2021, following two
previous applications that it withdrew before rulings. Rakuten is sometimes referred to as the
“Amazon of Japan”168 and has a similar business model to U.S. Big Tech companies. As such,
any decision by the FDIC will have regulatory arbitrage considerations (see “Systemic Risk”
above) and is likely to be interpreted by others with similar models considering entering banking.
Theoretically, a Big Tech with an ILC charter could benefit from access to deposits and deposit
insurance without the increased regulatory burden and costs of consolidated financial oversight
by the Federal Reserve System
