GUIDE | Labour hire: duties of persons conducting a business or undertaking Page 1 of 7
Labour hire: duties of persons
conducting a business or undertaking
This Guide provides information for persons conducting a business or
undertaking (PCBUs) involving the supply of workers (labour hire PCBUs) to
work for another business or undertaking (host PCBUs) on complying with their
health and safety duties under the model Work Health and Safety (WHS) laws.
Model Work Health and
Safety Act and labour hire
arrangements
Labour hire arrangements are covered by
the model WHS Act.
The primary duty of care under the model
WHS Act is owed by a PCBU to a ‘worker’,
which includes a labour hire worker. All
labour hire PCBUs and host PCBUs have a
primary duty of care to ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable, the health and
safety of labour hire workers engaged by, or
caused to be engaged by them, or whose
activities are influenced or directed by the
PCBU.
The model WHS Act provides that more
than one duty holder may have the same
duty, in this instance a labour hire PCBU
and a host PCBU. Labour hire
arrangements can be complex. In some
circumstances, there may be more than one
labour hire or host PCBU.
If more than one person has a duty for the
same matter, each person must meet their
duty to the extent to which they have the
capacity to influence and control the matter.
A labour hire PCBU or host PCBU may
exercise influence and control over a
relevant matter through, for example, the
terms of a contract or directing workers in a
practical sense. However, duty holders
cannot contract out of or transfer their WHS
obligations to another person.
Consultation between PCBUs
All duty holders in a labour hire
arrangement must consult, cooperate and
coordinate with each other so far as is
reasonably practicable.
Each duty holder should share information
to find out who is doing what and work
together in a cooperative and coordinated
way to ensure compliance with WHS laws.
For example, host and labour hire PCBUs
must discuss consultation arrangements,
the hazards and risks associated with the
work, what precautions will be taken to
ensure the health and safety of the labour
hire worker and the respective roles the
organisations in responding to an incident.
Some labour hire PCBUs may have
substantial knowledge of WHS issues and
risk management practices in their industry
that may assist in assessing the practices of
a host PCBU and ensuring compliance with
WHS laws.
Duty holders should not assume that
someone else is taking care of a health and
GUIDE | Labour hire: duties of persons conducting a business or undertaking Page 2 of 7
safety matter. Find out who is doing what
and work together with other duty holders
so risks are eliminated or minimised as far
as is reasonably practicable. What is
reasonable practicable will depend on the
circumstances.
Relevant issues for duty holders to discuss
will depend on the circumstances. These
may include:
• hazards and risks that may arise,
taking into account things like the
physical environment where work
will occur
• control measures to eliminate or
minimise risks and the suitability of
those measures
• compliance with minimum
requirements set by legislation, such
as the WHS laws
• how work will be carried out
(including safe work methods and
processes that are already in place
or need to be in place)
• the people involved in the work
(including supervision
arrangements)
• competency and training
requirements, including
arrangements for the provision of
additional training required for the
particular work
• arrangements for facilitating
assessments of the individual
worker’s needs and/or
competencies, as appropriate
• arrangements for health monitoring
and relevant vaccinations
• the respective roles of the
organisations in responding to an
incident, as well as relevant policies
and procedures, and
• any other factors which may impact
the work environment and how work
is carried out.
Like all PCBUs, labour hire and host
PCBUs are required to be proactive in
managing hazards and risks. The duties in
the model WHS Act are ongoing and must
be complied with throughout the labour hire
arrangement.
Be aware that circumstances can change
over time and this may result in a change in
the hazards and risks or in the ways they
may be eliminated or minimised. Changes
that may necessitate a review of hazards,
risks and control measures may include:
• change in a work process
• change in the physical environment
• different people undertaking the
work, with different skills or means
of co-ordinating activities
• new hazards are identified, and
• new ways to eliminate or minimise
risks are identified or invented.
If a labour hire worker has a reasonable
concern that to carry out the work would
expose them to a serious health or safety
risk, they may cease, or refuse to carry out
work. A labour hire and host PCBU must
not discriminate against a worker for
exercising this or any other right under the
model WHS Act.
Duties of a host PCBU
As a host PCBU under the model WHS Act,
you have the same health and safety duties
to labour hire workers as you do to other
types of workers. It is your duty to ensure,
so far as is reasonably practicable, the
health and safety of all workers while at
work. This duty requires you to eliminate or,
if that is not reasonably practicable, to
minimise risks to their health and safety. To
identify what is reasonably practicable to
do, you must take into account all the
relevant matters and work with the labour
hire PCBU/s to provide the highest level of
protection that is both possible and
reasonable in the circumstances.
GUIDE | Labour hire: duties of persons conducting a business or undertaking Page 3 of 7
As a host PCBU, you must also consult,
cooperate and coordinate activities with the
labour hire PCBU/s to ensure you meet
your obligations. The model WHS Act
specifically provides that you cannot
contract out of or transfer your WHS
obligations to another party, including
labour hire or other host PCBUs.
Before engaging labour hire workers
Before you engage labour hire workers to
carry out work, you should consider:
• providing the labour hire PCBU/s
with detailed information about the
nature of work to be carried out
including details of, and where
possible supporting material, relating
to:
o the work environment/s
o tasks to be performed
o accommodation
arrangements
o any known hazards or risks
o any plant or equipment to be
used
o organisational and WHS
arrangements, including
supervision arrangements
and any other organisations
responsible for the worker
during the arrangement
o health and safety risks
associated with the work,
and
o any skills, knowledge,
licenses and qualifications
required to safely undertake
the work.
• verifying, in consultation with the
labour hire PCBU, that the selected
worker/s have any necessary
qualifications, licences, skills and
training to carry out the work safely.
In limited circumstances, you may
be required to verify the worker/s are
medically fit to carry out the work
(see regulations 168 and 417(3)(b)
of the model WHS Regulations)
• discussing with the labour hire
PCBU arrangements for health
monitoring and vaccinations
• consulting with the labour hire
PCBU/s on WHS matters including
in relation to who will provide any
necessary equipment such as
personal protective equipment
(PPE), and relevant points of contact
for health and safety between the
organisations
• ensuring that general health and
safety information about the work,
workplace and work environment
has been provided to the worker/s.
Check that you have provided this
information in a way that is suitable,
adequate and readily
understandable for the worker/s
• eliminating or, if that is not
reasonably practicable, minimising
risks in the workplace
• establishing, in consultation with the
labour hire PCBU/s, a review
process for ensuring the ongoing
WHS of workers, and
• any more you can do to ensure the
health and safety of all your workers.
During a labour hire worker’s
placement
While labour hire workers are carrying out
work, you should consider:
• providing the worker/s with a site
specific safety induction outlining
WHS duties, policies, procedures
and practices in the workplace
including consultation methods
• where WHS advice or workplace
assessments are required, ensuring
the persons engaged to conduct
GUIDE | Labour hire: duties of persons conducting a business or undertaking Page 4 of 7
those assessments are suitably
qualified
• treating labour hire workers as you
would employees and other workers
with respect to health and safety and
the provision of a safe working
environment and PPE (if PPE is not
provided by the labour hire PCBU/s)
• providing adequate supervision of
the worker/s at all times to ensure
that work is being performed safely
• consulting with the labour hire
PCBU/s and worker/s regarding any
changes which may affect WHS.
Ensure you do not transfer workers
to new tasks or change the nature of
their work tasks, work environment
or work location until you have
consulted with the worker/s and
obtained the approval of the labour
hire PCBU/s
• encouraging labour hire workers to
participate in the identification of
hazards and risks specific to their
work
• supporting and encouraging labour
hire workers to participate in
workplace safety consultative
arrangements
• working with the labour hire PCBU/s
to facilitate appropriate WHS
arrangements. For example, allow
the labour hire PCBU/s access to
workers, the workplace and relevant
documents for the purpose of
workplace safety assessments and
to fulfil their WHS duties as a PCBU
• facilitating any assessments
conducted by the labour hire
PCBU/s, for example, WHS
management assessments or work
site assessments
• providing any further training,
instruction or information prior to
transferring a labour hire worker to
new tasks, in a way that is suitable,
adequate and readily
understandable to the worker.
• encouraging labour hire workers to
maintain contact with the labour hire
PCBU/s throughout their placement,
and
• in the event of an incident, notifying
the labour hire PCBU/s as soon as
practicable and working with them to
implement agreed arrangements.
For example, allowing the labour
hire PCBU/s access to the
workplace and to relevant
documents to fulfil their WHS duties
as a PCBU.
Duties of a labour hire PCBU
As a labour hire PCBU under the model
WHS laws, it is your duty to ensure, so far
as is reasonably practicable, the health and
safety of workers during their placement
with the host PCBU/s. It is your duty to
eliminate or, if that is not reasonably
practicable, minimise risks to health and
safety a labour hire worker may encounter.
In some circumstances, this means not
placing workers in, or removing workers
from, a workplace where you believe there
is a risk to their health and safety or where
risks have not been adequately controlled.
Before placing labour hire workers
Before you place labour hire workers, you
should consider:
• reviewing the host PCBU’s safety
record to satisfy yourself that they
provide a safe workplace
• gathering information about the work
and the workplace/s, including the
work environment/s, accommodation
arrangements, organisational
arrangements, health and safety
risks associated with the work and
any skills and knowledge the worker
will require to safely undertake the
GUIDE | Labour hire: duties of persons conducting a business or undertaking Page 5 of 7
work. This might include information
about facilities, work schedules and
environmental factors, such as
whether work will be conducted
outdoors
• providing workers with suitable,
adequate and readily
understandable WHS induction and
training. Include any risks you have
identified and consultation methods
you have established with workers
and the host PCBU/s
• verifying and working with the host
PCBU to ensure site specific and
task specific induction, training and
PPE is provided to labour hire
workers in a way that is suitable,
adequate and readily
understandable to them
• assessing the workplace/s for any
risks to health and safety, as
appropriate. Work with the host
PCBU/s to gather enough
information to make an assessment,
for example, by arranging a
workplace visit. Where risks are
identified, consult with the host/s to
ensure they are eliminated, or if that
is not reasonably practicable,
minimised
• ensuring that workers have the
necessary qualifications, licences,
skills and training to safely carry out
the work. In limited circumstances
you may be required to verify the
worker/s are medically fit to carry out
the work (see regulations 168 and
417(3)(b) of the model WHS
Regulations).
• consulting with the host PCBU and
workers to ensure you and the
workers understand and are
confident in your understanding of
the WHS policies, procedures and
practices of the host PCBU/s
• discussing with the host PCBU
arrangements for health monitoring
and vaccinations
• establishing communication
methods workers can use to contact
you if they consider there is any risk
to their health or safety
• discussing consultation
arrangements with the host PCBU/s
• ensuring workers have the means to
identify and take action in an unsafe
situation at the host workplace, such
as stopping work or bringing it to the
attention of the host PCBU/s, a
health and safety committee
representative or health and safety
representative
• ensuring workers have the means
to raise safety issues with you if they
are unsatisfied with the host PCBU’s
response
• establishing, in consultation with the
host PCBU/s, a review process for
ensuring the ongoing WHS of
workers, and
• any more you can do to ensure the
health and safety of the labour hire
worker.
During a labour hire worker’s
placement
While your workers are placed with the host
PCBU, you should consider:
• consulting with the host PCBU/s and
labour hire workers on any changes
which may affect their health and
safety. For example, this may
include consultation about the use of
plant and equipment not envisaged
prior to placement
• working with the host PCBU/s to
undertake workplace safety
assessments in accordance with
agreed arrangements
GUIDE | Labour hire: duties of persons conducting a business or undertaking Page 6 of 7
• where WHS advice or workplace
assessments are required, working
with the host PCBU to ensure the
person/s engaged to conduct those
assessments are suitably qualified
• monitoring the workplace for new
risks to health and safety and
consulting with the host PCBU/s
about how they might be addressed.
This might include regular visits to
the host/s workplace
• encouraging workers to maintain
contact with you and to provide
feedback on health and safety
matters in the host/s workplace
• taking effective action when the
worker or host PCBU/s identifies
risks or raises concerns about health
and safety. This might include
removing the worker from the
workplace, and
• in the event of an incident, working
with the host PCBU/s to respond
effectively.
Further information
More information on the topics covered in
this Guide can be found here:
• How to determine what is
reasonably practicable to meet a
health and safety duty
• The meaning of ‘persons conducting
a business or undertaking’
• Work health and safety consultation,
cooperation and coordination
You can also find further information about
other WHS topics on the Safe Work
Australia website swa.gov.au.
Safe Work Australia is a national policy
body responsible for WHS and workers’
compensation arrangements. We do not
regulate or enforce WHS or workers’
compensation laws.
This guide provides information on the
model WHS laws. It is important to consider
the WHS laws that apply in your
circumstances. To find out more, contact
your WHS regulator. Where your business
arrangements span multiple jurisdictions,
you may need to contact more than one
WHS regulator. The relevant contact details
are available on our website
swa.gov.au/whs-authorities-contactinformation.
In most jurisdictions the labour hire PCBU
(not the host PCBU) is responsible for
providing workers’ compensation to the
worker, however there are exemptions to
this. However, labour hire and host PCBUs
should work together to coordinate return to
work arrangements and support workers
through the return to work process. It is
important to contact your workers’
compensation authority for more information
on understanding and complying with your
workers’ compensation obligations as
penalties can apply.
Some jurisdictions have implemented a
labour hire licensing scheme. Safe Work
Australia cannot provide advice in relation
to these schemes. It is your responsibility to
identify whether these requirements apply
to you.
GUIDE | Labour hire: duties of persons conducting a business or undertaking Page 7 of 7
Disclaimer
Safe Work Australia is an Australian Government statutory agency established in 2009. Safe Work Australia includes Members from
the Commonwealth, and each state and territory, Members representing the interests of workers and Members representing the
interests of employers.
Safe Work Australia works with the Commonwealth, state and territory governments to improve work health and safety and workers’
compensation arrangements. Safe Work Australia is a national policy body, not a regulator of work health and safety. The
Commonwealth, states and territories have responsibility for regulating and enforcing work health and safety laws in their
jurisdiction.
ISBN 978-1-76051-811-0 (PDF)
ISBN 978-1-76051-812-7 (DOCX)
Creative Commons
With the exception of the Safe Work Australia logo, this copyright work is licensed under a Creative Commons AttributionNoncommercial 4.0 International licence. To view a copy of this licence, visit creativecommons.org/licenses In essence, you are
free to copy, communicate and adapt the work for non-commercial purposes, as long as you attribute the work to Safe Work
Australia and abide by the other licence terms.
Contact information
Safe Work Australia | info@swa.gov.au | www.swa.gov.au