Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID)-exacerbated respiratory disease (NERD) is characterized by moderate-to-severe asthma and a higher prevalence of chronic rhinosinusitis/nasal polyps, but is a highly heterogeneous disorder with various clinical manifestations. Two major pathogenic mechanisms are: (1) overproduction of cysteinyl leukotrienes with dysregulation of arachidonic acid metabolism and (2) increased type 2 eosinophilic inflammation affected by genetic mechanisms. Aspirin challenge is the gold standard to diagnose NERD, whereas reliable in vitro biomarkers have yet not been identified. Therapeutic approaches have been done on the basis of disease severity with the avoidance of culprit and cross-reacting NSAIDs, and when indicated, aspirin desensitization is an effective treatment option. Biologic approaches targeting Type 2 cytokines are emerging as potential therapeutic options. Here, we summarize the up-to-date evidence of pathophysiologic mechanisms and diagnosis/management approaches to the patients with NERD with its phenotypic classification.
 

 Introduction
 Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid, ASA) and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the most commonly prescribed drugs in the world (Doña et al., 2012); however, they are considered the most common causes of hypersensitivity reactions to drugs (Blanca-Lopez et al., 2018). Hypersensitivity reactions to NSAIDs have recently been classified by the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI) and European Network of Drug Allergy (ENDA): 1) pharmacologic reactions (mediated by cyclooxygenase [COX]-1 inhibitions) include NSAID-exacerbated respiratory disease (NERD), NSAID-exacerbated cutaneous disease (NECD) and NSAID-induced urticarial/angioedema (NIUA), and present cross-intolerance to various COX-1 inhibitors; 2) selective responses (mediated by immunologic mechanisms) include single NSAIDs-induced urticaria, angioedema and/or anaphylaxis (SNIUAA) and single NSAIDs-induced delayed hypersensitivity reactions (SNIDHR) (Kowalski and Stevenson, 2013). NERD is a major phenotype among cross-intolerant categories of NSAID hypersensitivity and had been called ASA-induced asthma, ASA-intolerant asthma, ASA-sensitive asthma; however, NERD and ASA-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) are commonly used (Sánchez-Borges, 2019). The prevalence of NERD is reported to be 5.5% to 12.4% in the general population (Lee et al., 2018a; Chu et al., 2019; Taniguchi et al., 2019), 7.1% among adult asthmatics and 14.9% among severe asthmatics (Rajan et al., 2015), while it rarely occurs in children (Taniguchi et al., 2019). No relationships were found with family history or NSAID administration history (Kowalski et al., 2011; Taniguchi et al., 2019).
 

 NERD is characterized by moderate-to-severe asthma and a higher prevalence of chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) nasal polyps (NPs) with persistent eosinophilic inflammation in the upper and lower airways (Taniguchi et al., 2019) as well as NSAID hypersensitivity where cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) over-production and chronic type 2 airway inflammation are key findings (Taniguchi et al., 2019). The diagnosis of NERD is confirmed by ASA challenge (via orally, bronchially or nasally route) and supported by potential biomarkers (Pham et al., 2017; Cingi and Bayar Muluk, 2020). In addition, in vitro cell activation tests and radiological imaging with nasal endoscopy can aid in NERD diagnosis (Taniguchi et al., 2019). This review updates the current knowledge on pathophysiologic mechanisms including molecular genetic mechanisms as well as the diagnosis and treatment of NERD.
 

 Clinical Features
 NERD is characterized by chronic type 2 inflammation in the upper and lower airways; therefore, patients suffer from chronic persistent asthmatic symptoms and CRS with/without NPs, which are exacerbated by ASA/NSAID exposure and refractory to conventional medical or surgical treatment. Some patients are accompanied by cutaneous symptoms such as urticaria, angioedema, flushing or gastrointestinal symptoms (Buchheit and Laidlaw, 2016). Previous studies suggested that NERD is more common in females (middle-age onset) and non-atopics (Choi et al., 2015; Trinh et al., 2018). It was reported that rhinitis symptoms appear and then evolve into CRS which worsens asthmatic symptoms, subsequently followed by ASA intolerance (Szczeklik et al., 2000). However, their clinical presentations and courses have been found to be heterogeneous. It has been increasingly required to classify the subphenotypes of NERD according to its clinical features. One study demonstrated 4 subphenotypes by applying a latent class analysis in a Polish cohort: class 1 patients showing moderate asthma with upper airway symptoms and blood eosinophilia; class 2 patients showing mild asthma with low healthcare use; class 3 patients showing severe asthma with severe exacerbation and airway obstruction; and class 4 patients showing poorly controlled asthma with frequent and severe exacerbation (Bochenek et al., 2014). Another study showed 4 subtypes presenting distinct clinical/biochemical findings in a Korean cohort using a 2-step cluster analysis based on 3 clinical phenotypes (urticaria, CRS and atopy status): subtype 1 (NERD with CRS/atopy and no urticaria), subtype 2 (NERD with CRS and no urticaria/atopy), subtype 3 (NERD without CRS/urticaria), and subtype 4 (NERD with acute/chronic urticaria exacerbated by NSAID exposure) (Lee et al., 2017). Each subtype had distinct features in the aspect of female proportion, the degree of eosinophilia, leukotriene (LT) E4 metabolite levels, the frequency of asthma exacerbation, medication requirements (high-dose ICS-LABA or systemic corticosteroids) and asthma severity, suggesting that stratified strategies according to subtype classification may help achieve better clinical outcomes in the management of NERD.