In 1966, Congress passed legislation that later became known as the Animal Welfare Act (P.L.
89-544) with goals of preventing the theft and sale of pets to research laboratories and regulating
the humane care and handling of dogs, cats, and other laboratory animals. The Animal Welfare
Act as amended (AWA, 7 U.S.C. §§2131-2156) is the central federal statute governing the
humane care and handling of mammals and certain other animals. Since its enactment, Congress
has amended the law to expand the types of animals it covers and activities it regulates and to
clarify various provisions. These amendments have strengthened enforcement, expanded coverage to more animals and
activities, and curtailed cruel practices (e.g., animal fighting), among other things.
The AWA covers any live or dead warm-blooded animal, as defined, determined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) to be used for research, exhibition, or as a pet. In addition, the AWA addresses animal fighting and the importation
of certain dogs into the United States. The AWA’s statutory definition of animal excludes birds, rats, and mice bred for
research; horses not used for research; and other farm animals used in the production of food and fiber. The act applies to
animal dealers (e.g., pet breeders, medical research suppliers), exhibitors (e.g., zoos, circuses), research facilities (e.g., private
and federal laboratories that use animals in research), and transporters (e.g., airlines, railroads, truckers). Covered entities
must meet certain standards described in law and regulation and keep certain records. The AWA establishes penalties for
noncompliance.
USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) administers the AWA. In carrying out this responsibility,
APHIS promulgates and updates AWA regulations; licenses and registers entities subject to the AWA; inspects the premises
of licensed and registered entities; investigates potential violations; and enforces AWA provisions.
Animal welfare issues generate significant attention from stakeholder groups. For example, animal welfare advocates have
called on Congress to define specific standards for animal care within AWA legislation, increase AWA enforcement, and
expand AWA coverage to even more covered animals, entities, and activities. Other stakeholders, including entities regulated
under the AWA, have called on Congress to streamline USDA’s AWA oversight and enforcement. Additional issues debated
in recent years include the role and care of research animals and federal oversight of pet breeding operations, circuses, and
animal shelters.