Renal Impairment
After multiple-dose administration of buspirone to renally impaired (Clcr = 10–
70 mL/min/1.73 m2) patients, steady-state AUC of buspirone increased 4-fold compared
with healthy (Clcr ≥80 mL/min/1.73 m2) subjects (see PRECAUTIONS).
Race Effects
The effects of race on the pharmacokinetics of buspirone have not been studied.
INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BuSpar is indicated for the management of anxiety disorders or the short-term relief of
the symptoms of anxiety. Anxiety or tension associated with the stress of everyday life
usually does not require treatment with an anxiolytic.
The efficacy of BuSpar has been demonstrated in controlled clinical trials of outpatients
whose diagnosis roughly corresponds to Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD). Many of
the patients enrolled in these studies also had coexisting depressive symptoms and
BuSpar relieved anxiety in the presence of these coexisting depressive symptoms. The
patients evaluated in these studies had experienced symptoms for periods of 1 month to
over 1 year prior to the study, with an average symptom duration of 6 months.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (300.02) is described in the American Psychiatric
Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, III1 as follows:
Generalized, persistent anxiety (of at least 1 month continual duration), manifested by
symptoms from three of the four following categories:
1. Motor tension: shakiness, jitteriness, jumpiness, trembling, tension, muscle aches,
fatigability, inability to relax, eyelid twitch, furrowed brow, strained face, fidgeting,
restlessness, easy startle.
2. Autonomic hyperactivity: sweating, heart pounding or racing, cold, clammy hands,
dry mouth, dizziness, lightheadedness, paresthesias (tingling in hands or feet), upset
stomach, hot or cold spells, frequent urination, diarrhea, discomfort in the pit of the
stomach, lump in the throat, flushing, pallor, high resting pulse and respiration rate.
4
Reference ID: 2867200
3. Apprehensive expectation: anxiety, worry, fear, rumination, and anticipation of
misfortune to self or others.
4. Vigilance and scanning: hyperattentiveness resulting in distractibility, difficulty in
concentrating, insomnia, feeling "on edge," irritability, impatience.
The above symptoms would not be due to another mental disorder, such as a depressive
disorder or schizophrenia. However, mild depressive symptoms are common in GAD.
The effectiveness of BuSpar in long-term use, that is, for more than 3 to 4 weeks, has not
been demonstrated in controlled trials. There is no body of evidence available that
systematically addresses the appropriate duration of treatment for GAD. However, in a
study of long-term use, 264 patients were treated with BuSpar for 1 year without ill effect.
Therefore, the physician who elects to use BuSpar for extended periods should
periodically reassess the usefulness of the drug for the individual patient.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
BuSpar is contraindicated in patients hypersensitive to buspirone hydrochloride.
WARNINGS
The administration of BuSpar to a patient taking a monoamine oxidase inhibitor
(MAOI) may pose a hazard. There have been reports of the occurrence of elevated
blood pressure when BuSpar (buspirone hydrochloride) has been added to a regimen
including an MAOI. Therefore, it is recommended that BuSpar not be used concomitantly
with an MAOI.
Because BuSpar has no established antipsychotic activity, it should not be employed in
lieu of appropriate antipsychotic treatment.
PRECAUTIONS
General
Interference with Cognitive and Motor Performance
Studies indicate that BuSpar is less sedating than other anxiolytics and that it does not
produce significant functional impairment. However, its CNS effects in any individual
patient may not be predictable. Therefore, patients should be cautioned about operating an
5
Reference ID: 2867200
automobile or using complex machinery until they are reasonably certain that buspirone
treatment does not affect them adversely.
While formal studies of the interaction of BuSpar (buspirone hydrochloride) with alcohol
indicate that buspirone does not increase alcohol-induced impairment in motor and
mental performance, it is prudent to avoid concomitant use of alcohol and buspirone.
Potential for Withdrawal Reactions in Sedative/Hypnotic/Anxiolytic Drug-
Dependent Patients
Because BuSpar does not exhibit cross-tolerance with benzodiazepines and other
common sedative/hypnotic drugs, it will not block the withdrawal syndrome often seen
with cessation of therapy with these drugs. Therefore, before starting therapy with
BuSpar, it is advisable to withdraw patients gradually, especially patients who have been
using a CNS-depressant drug chronically, from their prior treatment. Rebound or
withdrawal symptoms may occur over varying time periods, depending in part on the type
of drug, and its effective half-life of elimination.
The syndrome of withdrawal from sedative/hypnotic/anxiolytic drugs can appear as any
combination of irritability, anxiety, agitation, insomnia, tremor, abdominal cramps,
muscle cramps, vomiting, sweating, flu-like symptoms without fever, and occasionally,
even as seizures.
Possible Concerns Related to Buspirone's Binding to Dopamine Receptors
Because buspirone can bind to central dopamine receptors, a question has been raised
about its potential to cause acute and chronic changes in dopamine-mediated neurological
function (eg, dystonia, pseudo-parkinsonism, akathisia, and tardive dyskinesia). Clinical
experience in controlled trials has failed to identify any significant neuroleptic-like
activity; however, a syndrome of restlessness, appearing shortly after initiation of
treatment, has been reported in some small fraction of buspirone-treated patients. The
syndrome may be explained in several ways. For example, buspirone may increase central
noradrenergic activity; alternatively, the effect may be attributable to dopaminergic
effects (ie, represent akathisia). See ADVERSE REACTIONS: Postmarketing
Experience.