Policymakers interested in addressing the opioid epidemic may want to understand why the United States consumes a disproportionate amount of opioids. The scientific evidence suggests that many factors may influence this disparity between the United States and other economically advanced countries. This report synthesizes the scientific research to explain relevant factors regarding the difference between opioid consumption in the United States and other comparable industrialized countries, such as the G-7 countries.  

A review of scientific literature on international and domestic opioid use pointed to several factors affecting the difference in consumption per capita.3  

Prescribing practices of health care providers appear to be a primary factor affecting consumption. U.S. health care providers prescribe opioids more frequently, at higher doses, and throughout more stages of pain treatment—including as a first-line treatment—than their European counterparts. Use of higher-potency opioids—with greater morphine milligram equivalents (MMEs) per dose—appears especially high in the United States compared with other countries. Although there is generally no agreed upon threshold value of what constitutes a “high potency” opioid,4 clinical guidelines and research studies often use MMEs per day or per dose to establish a threshold.5 The MME metric allows for standardization of dose across different opioid analgesics. Table 1 lists the MME conversion factors of several commonly used opioid 
analgesics, as defined by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).6 Clinical guidelines published by the World Health Organization (WHO) and others discourage using high-potency opioids and opioids as a first-line treatment for long-term chronic noncancer pain management.7 
 
Several additional factors besides higher prescribing practices may explain the higher relative use of opioids in the United States. It is possible the United States has a greater prevalence of pain, and that Americans experience, or at least self-report, more intense pain. Americans may receive more opioids at more frequent points in care rather than more comprehensive approaches to pain 
management, such as those that use combinations of pharmaceutical, psychological, and physical therapies. Higher opioid-prescribing practices may be driven by insurance reimbursement systems that incentivize opioids over alternative pain treatments, cost structures that promote more efficient care, or evaluations that prioritize patient satisfaction and conflate it with pain management. Compared with most of its European counterparts, the U.S. medical system allows for more autonomy for health care providers, imposes fewer national government regulations on health care practices, and permits more direct-to-provider marketing practices. In addition, prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMPs) in the United States are decentralized. PDMPs in the United States are generally structured to monitor bad actors and generally not designed to 
promote best practices aligned with clinical guidance. More broadly, cultural differences, such as expectations about pain relief and entitlements to opioid treatment, may also explain the greater 
reliance on pharmacological treatments in the United States. 

Health care systems that provide more expansive access to care may allow for greater preventive care and more multimodal approaches to pain, in part because there may be fewer barriers to 
using these types of treatments. Moreover, providers operating in highly regulated systems may be less susceptible to the direct and indirect influences experienced by American providers, such as profit-driven fee-for-service incentives or direct-to-provider pharmaceutical marketing. The U.S. federal government leaves the majority of medical practice regulation to individual states. This decentralized system may impose rules governing prescribing practices (e.g., those instituted in European countries to prevent adverse outcomes of opioid use) at a slower pace than those 
imposed by centrally governed health care systems.