**COVID-19 and Stroke Incidence**

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been
declared a pandemic for two years already.1,2 As of July
2022, more than 575 million people have been infected, of
which around 6.39 million have died.3 Although its case
fatality rate of »2% is lower compared to past influenza
pandemics, its highly transmissible nature strains the
health care systems leading to significant increases in
mortalities and unfavorable morbidities even in highly
urbanized countries.1,4 With the appearance of delta and
other variants, the devastation induced by COVID-19 is
not likely to end soon.
While most COVID-19 patients present in the hospital
with respiratory symptoms, other organ systems may
also be affected.5,6 Around 0.8-6% will develop stroke
among COVID-19 patients, while 2-3% of admitted stroke
patients will harbor severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection.7,8 These COVID-19
stroke patients have twice the risk of death and they have
20% more risk of having a moderate disability compared
to patients with COVID-19 only.9 Nevertheless, COVID19 stroke patients were usually older and had similar risk
factors as those patients with stroke alone, implying that
the usual determinants for stroke may be the ones responsible for these increased risks and not COVID-19.1,7,9
However, in smaller case series and cross-sectional studies, COVID-19 patients with stroke were younger, with a
cryptogenic type of stroke, and with no identifiable risk
factors compared to those without COVID-19.9,10 Since
SARS-CoV-2 infection affects organ systems by inducing
thrombosis secondary to a hypercoagulable state, the incidence of stroke, especially the ischemic type, may plausibly be increased in COVID-19.1012
While most large studies about the possible association
of COVID-19 and stroke were done in high-income countries, only one study with a small sample size have been
done in low- to middle-income countries (LMIC) like the
Philippines.13 Developed countries have more organized
and advanced health care systems and reliable national
insurance services; hence, the incidence of stroke, its risk
factors and mortality rate among COVID-19 patients may
not be comparable to the true situation in LMIC.6,8
A recently concluded nationwide multicenter, comparative, retrospective cohort study was conducted from February to December 2020 to identify the different
neurologic manifestations of COVID-19 in the Philippines.6 A total of 10,881 reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed COVID-19 cases were
collected.6 Our main objectives were a) to determine the
risk factors of stroke among hospitalized COVID19
patients in the Philippines, b) to determine the possible
association between these risk factors and stroke among
the same cohort, and c) to determine if there is an association between mortality and stroke in this same group.
Methodology
Study design
The data analyzed in this study were obtained from a
previously published nationwide retrospective cohort
study that identified the different neurologic manifestations of COVID-19 in the Philippines.6
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
RT-PCR-confirmed adult COVID-19 patients, more
than 18 years of age, with final hospital disposition, were
included in the study. Those with pneumonia caused by
other etiologies other than SARS-CoV-2 were excluded. A
complete enumeration of all patients fulfilling these criteria, who were admitted to the hospitals from February
until December 2020, was performed. The definition of
neurological symptoms was based on the previously published protocol.6 A patient who developed focal sensory
or motor deficit confirmed by either cranial computed
tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) were recorded as a stroke patient, as seen on chart
review. The imaging was the basis for classifying the
patient as either infarct or hemorrhagic stroke. COVID-19
stroke patients comprised the cases while COVID-19 only
patients constituted the control group.
Study site
Data collection was done in 37 referral hospitals for
COVID-19. Identification of these sites and other information regarding methods for data collection were described
in the published protocol.6
Study investigators
This is a part of the Philippine CORONA Study which
aimed to determine the incidence of the different neurological diseases and their association with different risk
factors and outcomes in a large cohort of COVID-19
patients. This was headed by four steering committee
members with 37 study site teams, of which the principal
investigators were all neurologists.6
2 R.D.G. JAMORA ET AL.
Data collection
The method of data collection has already been published.6 In brief, all COVID-19 confirmed admissions with
disposition (discharged or deceased) at the time of data collection were included in the study. A pre-made detailed
abstraction form containing the variables of interest was
filled out by the field physician by chart review. Possible
risk factors for stroke or increased COVID-19 severity such
as age, sex, smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus (DM),
heart failure, coronary artery disease, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchial asthma, chronic kidney disease, liver disease, obesity, malignancy, and human
immunodeficiency virus infection was obtained. For stroke,
the neurologic symptoms and final diagnosis during
admission, and different outcome measures like the severity of the disability, intensive care unit (ICU) admission,
duration from admission to final disposition, mortality status, and final disposition were included in the form.
Abstraction forms were then assessed for validity and
inconsistencies before they were de-identified, encoded,
and collated per hospital and sent to the Steering Committee of the Philippine CORONA study.
Data analysis
Age was presented as mean, while categorical data
were presented as proportions. Standard deviation was
used as measure of dispersion. Means and proportions
were tested for significance using unpaired t-test and test
of two proportions, respectively. Prevalence ratio, defined
as the ratio of the proportion of patients with a particular
risk factor in COVID-19 stroke patients divided by the
proportion of patients with the same risk factor among
COVID-19 only patients were computed separately. These
were used as estimates of relative risks. The incidence of
stroke among patients with COVID-19 was computed by
dividing the number of stroke patients by the population
(n = 10,881). Likewise, the incidence of different outcome
measures like mortality, disability, and intensive care unit
(ICU) admission in both COVID-19 stroke patients and
COVID-19 patients only were obtained by dividing the
number of each of these outcome measures by the number
of patients who developed stroke and those who did not,
respectively. Subsequently, relative risks were computed
by dividing the incidence of each outcome measure
among COVID-19 stroke patients by the incidence of outcome measure among those with COVID-19 patients
only. To determine the association between stroke and
different risk factors; and the different outcome measures
and stroke among COVID-19 patients, a univariate logistic regression was done. Stroke and outcome measures
were used as dependent variables separately, while risk
factors for stroke, and stroke were used as their independent variables, respectively. An extended Cox proportional hazard survival analysis was also done using
mortality status as the failure event and the duration from
admission to either censoring or failure as survival time.
Significant risk factors identified in the logistic regression
was used as the predictor variables with presence of
stroke as the focus. Since the presence of stroke was a
time dependent variable based on the usage of scaled and
unscaled Schoenfield residuals, an extended Cox model
was used. All data were captured and analyzed using
Stata Pro BE 17, with alpha set at < 0.05 as indicator of
significance.
Results
Baseline characteristics
There were 10,881 RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 cases
included in the Philippine CORONA Study. The patients
were mostly males (n = 5780, 53.1%), with history of neurological disorder (n = 7560, 69.5%), with hypertension
(n = 3647, 33.5%), and DM (n = 2191, 20.1%). Only 321
patients with COVID-19 (3%) had a history of stroke.
The overall incidence of stroke among COVID-19
patients was 3.4% (n = 367). Of these, 262 (71.4%) had
acute ischemic stroke (AIS) and 101 (27.5%) had acute
hemorrhagic stroke (AHS). The incidence of AIS and AHS
were 2.4% and 0.9%, respectively.
A total of 1697 COVID-19 patients (15.6%) died due to
various etiologies. Most patients who had neurologic
symptoms were stable but had persistent deficits at discharge (71.7%). Only 1751 patients (16%) were admitted
to the ICU primarily due to acute respiratory failure.