As discussed earlier in this report, household decisionmaking related to retirement has become more important over time. The shift from DB to DC retirement plans requires families to assume more responsibility for managing their retirement and making decisions about retirement account contributions and investments, as well as making decisions about how to draw down these funds in retirement. For this reason, understanding household decisionmaking in retirement planning is important, particularly when considering retirement savings policy issues and the impact of different policy options on retirement security.
The life-cycle model is a prevalent economic hypothesis that assumes households usually want to keep consumption levels stable over time.57 For example, severely reducing consumption one month may be more painful for people than the pleasure of a much higher household consumption level in another month. Therefore, people save and invest during their careers in order to afford a stable income across their lives, including in retirement. This model suggests that wealth should increase as people age, which generally fits household financial data in the United States.58 In this theory, households adjust their savings rate during their working years rationally, based on interest rates, investment returns, life expectancy, Social Security or pension benefits, and other relevant factors. Evidence exists that some households adjust their retirement planning based on these types of factors.59 However, in the United States, income and consumption move together more closely than the life-cycle model would predict, suggesting some households may not save enough for their retirement needs or other lower-income periods.
Mainstream economic theory asserts that competitive free markets generally lead to efficient distributions of goods and services to maximize value for society.61 If certain conditions hold, policy interventions cannot improve on the financial decisions that consumers make based on their unique situations and preferences. For this reason, some policymakers are hesitant to disrupt free markets, based on the theory that prices determined by market forces lead to efficient outcomes without intervention. However, in these theoretical frameworks, a free market may become inefficient due to departures from standard economic assumptions, which includes assuming that consumers and firms act rationally with perfect information. When these assumptions do not hold, it may cause a reduction in economic efficiency and consumer welfare. In these cases, government policy can potentially bring the market to a more efficient outcome, maximizing social welfare. Yet, policymakers often find it challenging to determine whether a policy intervention will help or harm a particular market to reach its efficient outcome.
The following section discusses behavioral biases, which are a specific departure from the rational decisionmaking condition associated with theoretical economic efficiency. This departure is particularly important for understanding people’s decisionmaking in saving for retirement and investment markets. When people act with predictable biases, markets may become less efficient, and government policy—such as consumer disclosures or other plan design requirements—may be appropriate. However, these policies may also lead to unintended outcomes, which should be taken into account.
Behavioral research suggests that people tend to have biases in rather predictable patterns.62 This research suggests that the human brain has evolved to quickly make judgments in bounded, rational ways, using heuristics—or mental shortcuts—to make decisions. These heuristics generally help people make appropriate decisions quickly and easily, but they can sometimes result in choices that make the decisionmaker worse off financially. For example, the number, order, and structure of options, as well as the process around the choice, can change decisions for many people. A few of these biases tend to be particularly important for understanding retirement planning decisionmaking: 
Choice Architecture. Research suggests that how financial decisions are framed can affect consumer decisionmaking. Framing can affect decisions in many ways. 
•	Anchoring. People can be influenced, or anchored, by an initial number, even if it is unrelated to their next choice.64 In one illustration of this concept, researchers had subjects spin a wheel of fortune with numbers between 0 and 100, then asked them the percentage of African countries in the United Nations. The random number generated in the first stage subconsciously affected subjects’ guesses in the second stage, even though they were not related. Therefore, without the anchor, people’s estimates likely would have been different. In the retirement savings context, the automatic contribution rate in 401(k)s and the percent of salary at which employers provide maximum matches may be anchors that influence how much a person decides to put toward retirement savings.
•	Defaults. People can also be influenced by defaults established in how a decision is framed. 66 For example, employees are more likely to be enrolled in a 401(k) plan if an employer defaults them into it than if they actively need to make a choice to participate. 
•	Choice Overload. When making decisions, people often find it difficult to navigate complexity, such as many choices to choose from or items to consider. In the retirement savings context, this means that more investment fund options in retirement savings plans can sometimes lead to procrastination or failure to make a decision. Choice overload can also lead to poor decisionmaking, as some research suggests that fewer choices in retirement savings plans might lead to better retirement investment decisions
•	 Asset Allocation and Diversification. People tend to naively make diversification choices when making allocation decisions. For example, in the retirement context, when making decisions about how much to invest in a collection of funds, some people choose to spread their investments evenly across available funds (whether financially appropriate for their situation or not). 
Biases Toward the Future. Research suggests that common cognitive biases towards the future can also affect consumer decisionmaking. 
Present Bias. When people tend to put more value on having something now, rather than in the future—even when there is a large benefit for waiting—this behavior is called present bias. For example, in the retirement context, people tend to have a preference for lump sums over annuities, independent of risk considerations. Research suggests that people with more present bias tend to save less for retirement when controlling for other factors.
Self-Control. Even when people decide they should do something, such as saving for the future or choosing a retirement plan, self-control and procrastination may prevent them from following their intentions. These human biases might lead consumers to make financial decisions that are not optimal, such as undersaving.
Although consumers might not be aware of these biases when making financial decisions, firms may take advantage of them to attract consumers. For example, choice architecture biases might influence how marketing materials are developed, emphasizing certain terms—such as high past investment return rate—to make a financial product seem more desirable to consumers. In addition, product features may be developed to take advantage of people’s present bias or selfcontrol mistakes. Less knowledgeable retirement savers’ decisionmaking might be more sensitive to choice architecture biases.  Biases can also be used to encourage people to save more for retirement and make better retirement decisions. For example, some research suggests that choice architecture environments can make retirement more salient (e.g., annual consumer disclosures that project future retirement income may lead to more retirement savings). Moreover, how saving and investment options are framed may help some people make better retirement decisions. For example, some research suggests that preference checklists, which list factors—such as perceived health, life expectancy, and risk of outliving one’s resources—that people should consider when making a retirement decision, may improve retirement decisionmaking. Although these techniques can be used to encourage socially beneficial goals, such as planning and saving more for retirement, changing the choice environment can also sometimes have perverse impacts. For example, defaulting people at a fixed savings rate can increase participation in retirement plans on average but may discourage some people from making an active decision when they start a new job to increase the contribution rate from the default to a higher level. For these people, the lower contribution rate may lead to less retirement savings over time. Likewise, defaulting people into life-cycle retirement investment plans may lead to more appropriate long-term investment decisions on average, but the investment default also may encourage fewer people to make active decisions or put them in a plan that may conflict with other savings vehicles.  Moreover, although defaulting people into 401(k)s can increase the number of people who save for retirement, it may also lead to increased consumer debt without large impacts on household net worth over time.
