Organisational input factors  Already the terms knowledge-intensive organisation and knowledge workers highlight the fact that human capital of employees is the most important input. Their ability to convert previous knowledge and experiences into new solutions forms the base for organisations’ operation. It is, in fact, what pure knowledge-intensive organisations are selling. Essential are not only the knowledge reserves of the workers, but also what they are able to do with them. (Drucker 1999, p. 84)  Characteristic to knowledge work is also the element of learning. For example a person working in product development has to be able to observe his research subject and to learn from it, as well as to be able to apply the things he learns into new products. To a certain point, also a knowledge worker’s productivity can be increased by education, but above all, as Polanyi (1966) states it, most of the exploitable human capital is tacit in nature and is formed through experience rather than learned from books (according to Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995, pp. 59-61). Because human memory is limited, it is relevant that workers can share their information and knowledge with each other – learn themselves but also teach others (Drucker 1999, pp. 84).   Learning and the ability to create new things are also highlighted when the organisation’s objective is to innovate. Organisation’s innovativeness  can be defined as an ability to maintain existing success factors at the same time, when new solutions are made in order to ensure competitive advantage also in future (Pöyhönen 2004, Ståhle et al. 2004, p. 13). The innovative potential is basically in the employees, but it can be brought about by different managerial actions. It requires at least an implication from the management that innovative behaviour is what is expected from the employee. Innovativeness appears as worker’s ability to create new solutions and not just relying on existing practises and models.   On the other hand, sharing of information is important when we think about information used in work process. This includes not only information that is gathered from the customer but  6
also information, which already exists in the organisation but is not specifically “owned” by certain employee. Just as in manual work, waiting and searching for resources hinders productivity of a knowledge worker – their resources are only immaterial in nature and it might be more difficult to pay attention to the time used in looking for information. It often is a part of the work to look for adequate new information. However, it is not productive that employees should spend time looking for information that already exists but is too difficult to find. Although information systems are nowadays used by virtually all companies, and are therefore seen more as a tool instead of a resource, their importance in information sharing is undeniable. Especially important is the worker’s ability to exploit them in their work and that information systems support the way an organisation answers to its customer’s needs. (Ståhle et al. 2004, p. 78) Information systems are, however, quite useless if the quality of information  they include is low – information is, for example, wrong or incomplete. Knowledge workers make decisions based on the information available, and if it is unsatisfactory, outcome of the process can be poor in quality or even totally unusable for the customer.  Information should not be shared only between the workers within organisation, but also with all interest groups. Organisational networks are a part of intellectual capital. An organisation can enforce some networks (customers, subcontractors, distributors, research partners etc.; Edvinsson and Malone 1997, p. 11) and provide its employees with sufficient means to attain information needed in their work. Insufficient networks can result in a deficit of information, which will evidently lead to inability to answer to customers’ needs and loss of competitive advantage.  Although knowledge work is distinctively described as something, where the workers themselves decide, how they manage their tasks (Pepitone 2002 refers to the amount of discretion required), in every organization there are certain standards, routines and practices that have come about in the course of time. They are based on mental models that the members share, and often reflect the values, norms, beliefs and myths of the organisation (Juuti 2003 and Schein 1987 according to Ståhle et al. 2004. p. 82). These standards can either support working or hinder it. Anyhow, they do exist and should not be neglected when examining productivity. Castells (2000) has argued, that standardisation of work processes intensifies also knowledge work especially when there is interaction between different actors of the process (see also McKenzie and van Winkelen 2004, p. 40). On the other hand both Jackson (1999) and Blom et al. (2001) have emphasised the ability of a knowledge-intensive organisation to utilise new practices to concentrate on allowing employees to determine their own approaches.  Time used in production is a rather complex input factor. Traditionally, productivity is seen increased if the output has been produced in shorter time period. This often happens also in knowledge work: when the workers learn how to do things and have more experience to which they can relate new problems they can perform similar tasks faster than before. However, there is a limit for how much time used can be decreased before the quality of work is eroded. In knowledge work, “quality is the essence of the output” (Drucker 1999, p. 84). Also, if a worker has too much time or too little work to do, his productivity can suffer. The key issue is to find the right balance.  Working environment and its effect on productivity has been researched rather extensively. It is also the area, where subjective productivity measurement has been mostly used. Lighting, air conditioning, cleaning, heating, noise controlling as well as office layouts are known to affect productivity (see for example Seppänen 2004 or Oseland and Bartlett 1999). Working environment at its worst prevents employees from doing their job and its best can contribute to innovative atmosphere (Davenport et al. 2002; Ståhle et al. 2004, pp. 78-82) Working environment includes not only physical facilities but also the psychological atmosphere and the organisational culture. They can actually be even more important in knowledge work, as  7
for example acceptance of new ideas (Kanter 1987, p. 181), common language (DeSimone and Hatsopoulos 1995: Von Krogh 1998), values and goals (West 1990) as well as approval of different people and taking failures as part of innovative work are known to support innovative atmosphere in organisations (in Ståhle et al. 2004, pp. 82-95).  But above all, even if the workers of knowledge-intensive organisation have all the other inputs described – human capital, knowledge and experiences, information systems, perfect working environment etc. – not much can be done with it, if they do not know what they are pursuing for. The clear aim of working is the essential for succeeding. As Drucker (1999, p. 84) puts it, the productivity assessment in knowledge work should always be based on the questions “What is the worker’s actual task?” instead of “How should the work be done?”. Therefore, in order to be able to fulfil their task, knowledge workers should be clearly aware what it is that the organisation wants them to do, and this should always be the first input to any process.