Do AI Outputs Enjoy Copyright Protection?
The question of whether or not copyright protection may be afforded to AI outputs—such as images
created by DALL-E or texts created by ChatGPT—likely hinges at least partly on the concept of
“authorship.” The U.S. Constitution authorizes Congress to “secur[e] for limited Times to Authors . . . the
exclusive Right to their . . . Writings.” Based on this authority, the Copyright Act affords copyright
protection to “original works of authorship.” Although the Constitution and Copyright Act do not
explicitly define who (or what) may be an “author,” the U.S. Copyright Office recognizes copyright only
in works “created by a human being.” Courts have likewise declined to extend copyright protection to
nonhuman authors, holding that a monkey who took a series of photos lacked standing to sue under the
Copyright Act; that some human creativity was required to copyright a book purportedly inspired by
celestial beings; and that a living garden could not be copyrighted as it lacked a human author.

A recent lawsuit challenged the human-authorship requirement in the context of works purportedly
“authored” by AI. In June 2022, Stephen Thaler sued the Copyright Office for denying his application to
register a visual artwork that he claims was authored “autonomously” by an AI program called the
Creativity Machine. Dr. Thaler argued that human authorship is not required by the Copyright Act. On
August 18, 2023, a federal district court granted summary judgment in favor of the Copyright Office. The
court held that “human authorship is an essential part of a valid copyright claim,” reasoning that only
human authors need copyright as an incentive to create works. Dr. Thaler has stated that he plans to
appeal the decision.

Assuming that a copyrightable work requires a human author, works created by humans using generative
AI could still be entitled to copyright protection, depending on the nature of human involvement in the
creative process. However, a recent copyright proceeding and subsequent Copyright Registration
Guidance indicate that the Copyright Office is unlikely to find the requisite human authorship where an
AI program generates works in response to text prompts. In September 2022, Kris Kashtanova registered
a copyright for a graphic novel illustrated with images that Midjourney generated in response to text
inputs. In October 2022, the Copyright Office initiated cancellation proceedings, noting that Kashtanova
had not disclosed the use of AI. Kashtanova responded by arguing that the images were made via “a
creative, iterative process.” On February 21, 2023, the Copyright Office determined that the images were
not copyrightable, deciding that Midjourney, rather than Kashtanova, authored the “visual material.” In
March 2023, the Copyright Office released guidance stating that, when AI “determines the expressive
elements of its output, the generated material is not the product of human authorship.”

Some commentators assert that some AI-generated works should receive copyright protection, arguing
that AI programs are like other tools that human beings have used to create copyrighted works. For
example, the Supreme Court has held since the 1884 case Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony that
photographs can be entitled to copyright protection where the photographer makes decisions regarding
creative elements such as composition, arrangement, and lighting. Generative AI programs might be seen
as a new tool analogous to the camera, as Kashtanova argued.

Other commentators and the Copyright Office dispute the photography analogy and question whether AI
users exercise sufficient creative control for AI to be considered merely a tool. In Kashtanova’s case, the
Copyright Office reasoned that Midjourney was not “a tool that [] Kashtanova controlled and guided to
reach [their] desired image” because it “generates images in an unpredictable way.” The Copyright Office
instead compared the AI user to “a client who hires an artist” and gives that artist only “general
directions.” The office’s March 2023 guidance similarly claims that “users do not exercise ultimate
creative control over how [generative AI] systems interpret prompts and generate materials.” One of
Kashtanova’s lawyers, on the other hand, argues that the Copyright Act does not require such exacting
creative control, noting that certain photographs and modern art incorporate a degree of happenstance.
Some commentators argue that the Copyright Act’s distinction between copyrightable “works” and
noncopyrightable “ideas” supplies another reason that copyright should not protect AI-generated works.
One law professor has suggested that the human user who enters a text prompt into an AI program—for
instance, asking DALL-E “to produce a painting of hedgehogs having a tea party on the beach”—has
“contributed nothing more than an idea” to the finished work. According to this argument, the output
image lacks a human author and cannot be copyrighted.

While the Copyright Office’s actions indicate that it may be challenging to obtain copyright protection for
AI-generated works, the issue remains unsettled. Applicants may file suit in U.S. district court to
challenge the Copyright Office’s final decisions to refuse to register a copyright (as Dr. Thaler did), and it
remains to be seen whether federal courts will agree with all of the office’s decisions. While the
Copyright Office notes that courts sometimes give weight to the office’s experience and expertise in this
field, courts will not necessarily adopt the office’s interpretations of the Copyright Act.

In addition, the Copyright Office’s guidance accepts that works “containing” AI-generated material may
be copyrighted under some circumstances, such as “sufficiently creative” human arrangements or
modifications of AI-generated material or works that combine AI-generated and human-authored material.
The office states that the author may only claim copyright protection “for their own contributions” to such
works, and they must identify and disclaim AI-generated parts of the work if they apply to register their
copyright. In September 2023, for instance, the Copyright Office Review Board affirmed the office’s
refusal to register a copyright for an artwork that was generated by Midjourney and then modified in
various ways by the applicant, since the applicant did not disclaim the AI-generated material.