AI POLICY, NOW AND IN THE FUTURE
Throughout history, humans have both shaped and adapted to new technologies. This
report anticipates that advances in AI technologies will be developed and fielded
gradually—not in sudden, unexpected jumps in the techniques themselves—and will
build on what exists today, making this adaptation easier. On the other hand, small
improvements to techniques, computing power, or availability of data can occasionally
lead to novel, game-changing applications. The measure of success for AI applications
is the value they create for human lives. Going forward, the ease with which people
use and adapt to AI applications will likewise largely determine their success.
Conversely, since AI applications are susceptible to errors and failures, a mark of
their success will be how users perceive and tolerate their shortcomings. As AI becomes
increasingly embedded in daily lives and used for more critical tasks, system mistakes
may lead to backlash from users and negatively affect their trust. Though accidents
in a self-driving car may be less probable than those driven by humans, for example,
they will attract more attention. Design strategies that enhance the ability of humans
to understand AI systems and decisions (such as explicitly explaining those decisions),
and to participate in their use, may help build trust and prevent drastic failures. Likewise,
developers should help manage people’s expectations, which will affect their happiness
and satisfaction with AI applications. Frustration in carrying out functions promised
by a system diminishes people’s trust and reduces their willingness to use the system
in the future.
Another important consideration is how AI systems that take over certain tasks
will affect people’s affordances and capabilities. As machines deliver super-human
performances on some tasks, people’s ability to perform them may wither. Already,
introducing calculators to classrooms has reduced children’s ability to do basic
arithmetic operations. Still, humans and AI systems have complementary abilities.
People are likely to focus on tasks that machines cannot do as well, including complex
reasoning and creative expression.
Already, children are increasingly exposed to AI applications, such as interacting
with personal assistants on cell phones or with virtual agents in theme parks. Having
early exposure will improve children’s interactions with AI applications, which
will become a natural part of their daily lives. As a result, gaps will appear in how
younger and older generations perceive AI’s influences on society.
43
Likewise, AI could widen existing inequalities of opportunity if access to AI
technologies—along with the high-powered computation and large-scale data that
fuel many of them—is unfairly distributed across society. These technologies will
improve the abilities and efficiency of people who have access to them. A person with
access to accurate Machine Translation technology will be better able to use learning
resources available in different languages. Similarly, if speech translation technology is
only available in English, people who do not speak English will be at a disadvantage.
Further, AI applications and the data they rely upon may reflect the biases of their
designers and users, who specify the data sources. This threatens to deepen existing
social biases, and concentrate AI’s benefits unequally among different subgroups
of society. For example, some speech recognition technologies do not work well for
women and people with accents. As AI is increasingly used in critical applications,
these biases may surface issues of fairness to diverse groups in society. On the other
hand, compared to the well-documented biases in human decision-making, AI-based
decision-making tools have the potential to significantly reduce the bias in critical
decisions such as who is lent money or sent to jail.
Privacy concerns about AI-enabled surveillance are also widespread, particularly
in cities with pervasive instrumentation. Sousveillance, the recording of an activity
by a participant, usually with portable personal devices, has increased as well. Since
views about bias and privacy are based on personal and societal ethical and value
judgments, the debates over how to address these concerns will likely grow and resist
quick resolution. Similarly, since AI is generating significant wealth, debates will grow
regarding how the economic fruits of AI technologies should be shared—especially as
AI expertise and the underlying data sets that fuel applications are concentrated in a
small number of large corporations.
To help address these concerns about the individual and societal implications
of rapidly evolving AI technologies, the Study Panel offers three general policy
recommendations:
1. Define a path toward accruing technical expertise in AI at all
levels of government. Effective governance requires more experts
who understand and can analyze the interactions between AI
technologies, programmatic objectives, and overall societal values.
Absent sufficient technical expertise to assess safety or other metrics, national or
local officials may refuse to permit a potentially promising application. Or insufficiently
trained officials may simply take the word of industry technologists and green light a
sensitive application that has not been adequately vetted. Without an understanding
of how AI systems interact with human behavior and societal values, officials will be
poorly positioned to evaluate the impact of AI on programmatic objectives.
2. Remove the perceived and actual impediments to research on the
fairness, security, privacy, and social impacts of AI systems.
Some interpretations of federal laws such as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
and the anti-circumvention provision of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act are
ambiguous regarding whether and how proprietary AI systems may be reverse engineered
and evaluated by academics, journalists, and other researchers. Such research is critical
if AI systems with physical and other material consequences are to be properly vetted
and held accountable.
3. Increase public and private funding for interdisciplinary studies of
the societal impacts of AI.
As a society, we are underinvesting resources in research on the societal implications
of AI technologies. Private and public dollars should be directed toward interdisciplinary
44
teams capable of analyzing AI from multiple angles. Research questions range from
basic research into intelligence to methods to assess and affect the safety, privacy,
fairness, and other impacts of AI.
Questions include: Who is responsible when a self-driven car crashes or an
intelligent medical device fails? How can AI applications be prevented from unlawful
discrimination? Who should reap the gains of efficiencies enabled by AI technologies
and what protections should be afforded to people whose skills are rendered obsolete?
As AI becomes integrated more broadly and deeply into industrial and consumer
products, it enters areas in which established regulatory regimes will need to be
adapted to AI innovations or in some cases fundamentally reconfigured according to
broadly accepted goals and principles.
The approach in the United States to date has been sector-specific, with oversight
by a variety of agencies. The use of AI in devices that deliver medical diagnostics and
treatments is subject to aggressive regulation by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), both in defining what the product is and specifying the methods by which it is
produced, including standards of software engineering. The use of drones in regulated
airspace falls under the authority of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).126 For
consumer-facing AI systems, regulation by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) comes
into play. Financial markets using AI technologies, such as in high-frequency trading,
come under regulation by the Security Exchange Commission (SEC).
In addition to sector-specific approaches, the somewhat ambiguous and broad
regulatory category of “critical infrastructure” may apply to AI applications.127 The
Obama Administration’s Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) 21 broadly defines critical
infrastructure as composed of “the assets, systems, and networks, whether physical or
virtual, so vital to the United States that their incapacitation or destruction would have
a debilitating effect on security, national economic security, national public health or
safety, or any combination thereof.” Today, an enterprise does not come under federal
regulation solely by falling under that broad definition. Instead, the general trend of
federal policy is to seek regulation in sixteen sectors of the economy.128
As regards AI, critical infrastructure is notably defined by the end-user application,
and not the technology or sector that actually produces AI software.