SERVICE ELIGIBILITY
 You are eligible for VA financing if your service falls within any of the following categories:
 Wartime Service. If you served any time during:
  World War II (September 16, 1940 to July 25, 1947),
  Korean Conflict (June 27, 1950 to January 31, 1955),
  Vietnam Era (August 5, 1964 to May 7, 1975), the Vietnam Era begins February 28,
 1961 for individuals who served in the Republic of Vietnam.
  Persian Gulf War (August 2, 1990 to present (requires service for 2 years or the full
 period for which called to active duty, except that exceptions applying to service
 between September 7, 1980 and August 1, 1990 also apply to Persian Gulf War).)
 See below.
 You must have served at least 90 days on active duty and been discharged or released under
 other than dishonorable conditions. If you served less than 90 days, you may be eligible if
 discharged because of a service-connected disability.
 Peacetime Service. If your service fell entirely within any one of the following periods:
  July 26, 1947 to June 26, 1950,
  February 1, 1955 to August 4, 1964, or
  May 8, 1975 to September 7, 1980 (if enlisted) or to October 16, 1981 (if officer, you
 must have served at least 181 days of continuous active duty and been discharged or
 released under conditions other than dishonorable). If you served less than 181 days,
 you may be eligible if discharged because of a service-connected disability.
 Service between September 7, 1980 (enlisted) or October 16, 1981 (officer) and
 August 1, 1990.
 If your entire period of service was between September 7, 1980 (October 16, 1981) and
 August 1, 1990, you must have:
  Completed 24 months of continuous active duty or the full period (at least 181 days) for which
 you were called or ordered to active duty, and been discharged or released under conditions
 other than dishonorable.
 You may also be determined eligible if you were discharged for a service-connected disability,
 or you were discharged for the convenience of the Government after completing at least 20
 months of a 2-year enlistment, or you completed 181 days of active duty and:
 were discharged because of a hardship, or
 were determined to have a service-connected compensable disability, or
 were discharged or released from active duty for a medical condition which preexisted service
 and has not been determined to be service-connected, or
 If the certificate cannot be issued by ACE, you can request it from VA, by completing VA Form
 26-1880, “Request for A Certificate of Eligibility.” The form should be submitted along with either
 • received an involuntary discharge or release from active duty for the convenience of the
 Government as a result of a reduction in force, or
 were discharged or released from active duty for a physical or mental condition not
 characterized as a disability and not the result of misconduct, but which did interfere with your
 performance of duty.
 NOTE: During the Persian Gulf War, the foregoing exceptions to the 2-year requirement apply,
 except that 90 days of active duty is sufficient in lieu of 181 days.
 Active Duty Service Personnel. If you are now on active duty, eligibility can be established
 after having served on continuous active duty for at least 90 days. Upon discharge or release
 from active duty, eligibility must be reestablished.
 Members of the Selected Reserve. Individuals who are not otherwise eligible and who have
 completed at least 6 years in the Reserves or National Guard, or been discharged because of a
 service-connected disability, and
  have been discharged with an honorable discharge, or
  have been placed on the retired list, or
  have been transferred to an element of the Ready reserve other than the
 Selected Reserve, or
  continue to serve in the Selected Reserve are eligible for a GI loan.
 Other Types of Service
 Certain United States citizens who served in the armed forces of a government allied with the
 United States in World War II.
 Unmarried surviving spouses of the above-described eligible persons who died as the result
 of service or service-connected injuries (Children of deceased veterans are not eligible).
 NOTE: Also, a surviving spouse who remarried on or after attaining age 57, and on or after
 December 16, 2003, may be eligible for the home loan benefit.
 The spouse of any member of the Armed Forces serving on active duty who is listed as
 missing in action, or is a prisoner of war and has been so listed for a total of more than 90
 days.
  Individuals with service as members in certain other organizations, services, programs and
 schools may also be eligible. Questions about whether this service qualifies for home loan
 benefits should be referred to your VA Regional Loan Center.
 Obtaining a Certificate of Eligibility
 VA determines your eligibility and, if you are qualified, a Certificate of Eligibility will be issued.
 ACE (automated certificate of eligibility): In some cases veterans can obtain the Certificate of
 Eligibility from a lender. Most lenders have access to the ACE system. This Internet based
 application can establish eligibility and issue an online Certificate of Eligibility in a matter of
 seconds. Not all cases can be processed through ACE - only those for which VA has sufficient
 data in our records. However, veterans are encouraged to ask their lenders about this method of
 obtaining a certificate.
 the originals or legible copies of your most recent discharge or separation papers covering active
 military duty since September 16, 1940, which show active duty dates and type of discharge.
 This form may be obtained from VA or at http://www.va.gov/vaforms/. If you were separated after
 January 1, 1950, you must submit DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge From Active
 Duty.
 In addition, if you are now on active duty and have not been previously discharged from active
 duty service, you must submit a statement of service which includes the name of the issuing
 authority (base or command), and is signed by or at the direction of an appropriate official. The
 statement must include date of entry on active duty and the duration of any time lost.
 Since there is no uniform document similar to the DD214 for proof of service in the Selected
 Reserve, a number of different forms may be accepted as documentation of service in the
 Selected Reserve. For those who served in the Army or Air National Guard and were discharged
 after at least 6 years of such service, NGB Form 22 may be sufficient. Those who served in the
 Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps or Coast Guard Reserves may need to rely on any of a
 variety of forms that document at least 6 years of honorable service. Often, it will be necessary to
 submit a combination of documents such as an Honorable Discharge certificate together with a
 retirement point’s statement. It is the reservist's responsibility to obtain and submit
 documentation of 6 years of honorable service.
 The Request for Certificate of Eligibility, VA Form 26-1880, should be mailed to the Atlanta
 Regional Loan Center, ATTN: COE (262), P.O. Box 100034, Decature, GA 30031. The Eligibility
 Center also maintains a toll free number (888-768-2132) for persons seeking information on
 eligibility.