What Standards Are and Why They Matter 
From computers and smartphones to cars and lightbulbs, societies rely on technology standards 
for everyday life. In the broadest sense, standards are the common and repeated use of rules, 
conditions, guidelines, or characteristics for products or related processes, practices, and 
production methods. They enable technology that is safe, universal, and interoperable. Standards 
define the requirements that make it possible for mobile phones sold in different countries to 
communicate across the world, for bank cards issued in one country to be recognized at ATMs in 
another, and for cars to run on fuel purchased from any gas station. Standards also help manage 
risk, security, safety, privacy, and quality in the development of new innovations. In short, good 
standards are good for business, good for consumers, and good for society. 
Standards Developing Organizations (SDOs) consist of experts from industry, academia, civil 
society groups, and government, all of whom share a common goal of ensuring safety, 
interoperability, and competition in a particular technology or technology application. In well
functioning SDOs, ideas are selected not on the basis of the nationality, employer, or personality 
originating them, but instead on the basis of technical merit. Six principles govern the 
international standards development process: transparency, openness, impartiality and consensus, 
effectiveness and relevance, coherence, and a commitment to participation by low- and 
middle-income countries. 
The private sector has led U.S. engagement with SDOs for more than 100 years. An example of 
how this system works comes from the communications industry. Qualcomm Technologies 
provided the proposal in the 1990s that became the basis for all 3G standards, while NTT 
Docomo, a large mobile phone operator in Japan, provided the proposal that later became LTE, 
the predominant standard for wireless broadband communication for mobile devices and data 
terminals.  
This private sector leadership has come with significant assistance from government and 
academia. In 1901, the Congress established the National Bureau of Standards—which has since 
become the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)—as the authoritative 
domestic measurement science research and standards laboratory. Not long after, five 
engineering societies and three Federal agencies banded together to establish a national non
governmental body now known as the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). ANSI is a 
private, nonprofit organization that administers and coordinates the U.S. standardization system 
and is the sole U.S. representative to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
and the International Electrotechnical Commission. Industry, consortia, and private-sector groups 
often complement the roles of NIST, ANSI, and ANSI-accredited SDOs, working together to 
develop standards to solve specific challenges. To date, this approach, supported by U.S. 
leadership, has fostered an effective and innovative system that has supercharged U.S. and global 
economic growth.  
In an era of rapid technological transformation and global scale, standards will continue to define 
and drive the markets of the future. Standards for CET—advanced technologies that are 
significant for U.S. competitiveness and national security - carry strategic significance.
The United States will work with all nations committed to an open and transparent standards system 
to lead the way in these new arenas - just as we did with previous internet, wireless 
communications, and other digital standards. Failing to do so will risk the United States’—and 
the world’s—innovation, security, and prosperity. 

Standards for Critical and Emerging 
Technology 
The United States will prioritize efforts for standards development for a subset of CET that are 
essential for U.S. competitiveness and national security, including the following areas: 
• Communication and Networking Technologies, which are enabling dramatic changes 
in how consumers, businesses, and governments interact, and which will form the basis 
of tomorrow’s critical communications networks; 
• Semiconductors and Microelectronics, including Computing, Memory, and Storage 
Technologies, which affect every corner of the global economy, society, and 
government, and which power a panoply of innovations and capabilities; 
• Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, which promise transformative 
technologies and scientific breakthroughs across industries, but which must be developed 
in a trustworthy and risk-managed manner; 
• Biotechnologies, which will affect the health, agricultural, and industrial sectors of all 
nations, and which will need to be used safely and securely to support the health of our 
citizens, animals, and environment; 
• Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Services, which are a largely invisible utility for 
technology and infrastructure, including the electrical power grid, communications 
infrastructure and mobile devices, all modes of transportation, precision agriculture, 
weather forecasting, and emergency response; 
• Digital Identity Infrastructure and Distributed Ledger Technologies, which 
increasingly affect a range of key economic sectors; 
• Clean Energy Generation and Storage, which are critical to the generation, storage, 
distribution, and climate-friendly and efficient utilization of energy, and to the security of 
the technologies that support energy-producing plants; and 
• Quantum Information Technologies, which leverage quantum mechanics for the 
storage, transmission, manipulation, computing, or measurement of information, with 
major national security and economic implications.  
There are also specific applications of CET that departments and agencies have determined will 
impact our global economy and national security. The United States will focus standards 
development activities and outreach on these applications, which include:  
• Automated and Connected Infrastructure, such as smart communities, Internet of 
Things, and other novel applications; 
• Biobanking, which involves the collection, storage, and use of biological samples; 
• Automated, Connected, and Electrified Transportation, including automated and 
connected surface vehicles of many types and unmanned aircraft systems, many of which 
may be electric vehicles (EVs), along with the safe and efficient integration into smart 
communities and the transportation system as a whole, including standards to integrate 
EVs with the electrical grid and charging infrastructure; 
• Critical Minerals Supply Chains, where we will promote standards that support 
increased sustainable extraction of critical minerals necessary to manufacture renewable 
energy technologies, semiconductors, and EVs;  
• Cybersecurity and Privacy, which are cross-cutting issues that are critical to enabling 
the development and deployment of emerging technologies and promote the free flow of 
data and ideas with trust; and 
• Carbon Capture, Removal, Utilization and Storage, which can build on evolving 
standards for CO2 storage, and emerging standards for point source carbon capture, 
removal, and utilization, especially as those standards relate to monitoring and 
verification. 