Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive, nonmotile, coagulase-positive coccoid bacterium of the Firmicutes phylum. Although the Staphylococcus genus includes 52 species and 28 subspecies (List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature), S. aureus is by far the most clinically relevant. S. aureus is found in the human commensal microbiota of the nasal mucosa in 20–40% of the general population1,2. The reported prevalence varies owing to differences in the size and demographics of the study populations, quality of sampling and culture techniques utilized3. When the cutaneous and mucosal barriers are disrupted, for example, owing to chronic skin conditions, wounds or surgical intervention, S. aureus can gain access to the underlying tissues or the bloodstream and cause infection. Persons with invasive medical devices (such as peripheral and central venous catheters) or compromised immune systems are particularly vulnerable to S. aureus infection4.
 

 Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) was first described in England in 1961 (Ref.5), soon after methicillin was introduced into clinical practice. Methicillin was initially widely used; however, because of its toxicity, it is now no longer marketed for human use and has largely been replaced by similar, more-stable penicillins such as oxacillin, flucloxacillin and dicloxacillin6. Nevertheless, the term methicillin-resistant S. aureus continues to be used. In the decade following its initial description, MRSA was responsible for hospital outbreaks (health-care-associated MRSA (HA-MRSA)) in many parts of the world7. A substantial change in MRSA epidemiology was observed when it was detected in individuals without previous health-care contact (referred to as community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA)), notably among indigenous populations in Australia in the 1980s8 and otherwise healthy persons, including children, in the United States in the 1990s9. Since the mid-2000s, it has also been associated with livestock exposure (livestock-associated MRSA (LA-MRSA))10.
 

 Several S. aureus clones (that is, bacteria that are indistinguishable from each other by a variety of genetic tests (for example, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, multilocus enzyme electrophoresis or ribotyping) or that are so similar that they are presumed to be derived from a common parent11) have developed into MRSA by uptake via horizontal gene transfer of staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec)12, a mobile genetic element that encodes the genes mecA or mecC, which confer resistance to methicillin and, therefore, to most β-lactam antibiotics. MRSA is often also resistant to multiple other antibiotic classes. Indeed, S. aureus has the remarkable ability to acquire resistance to any antibiotic7, which has major implications for current as well as future treatment options for this pathogen.
 

 Individuals with MRSA colonization or carriage (that is, the presence of bacteria that do not cause a detectable host immune response, cellular damage or clinical signs and symptoms of infection) have an increased risk of subsequent infection and are an important source of person-to-person transmission. Health-care facilities host persons who are predisposed to infection (for example, owing to invasive procedures and/or immune compromise) and are environments with high antibiotic selection pressure (which can contribute to the selection of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria) and frequent contact between individuals. These conditions have facilitated the epidemic spread of MRSA in hospitals; MRSA is now endemic in many health-care facilities throughout the world and, as a consequence, it has become a major focus for infection control efforts globally.