Nintendo Switch 2: Everything We Know About the New Console
 Nintendo’s new console is most likely arriving in 2025.
 Sarah Thwaites Avatar
 By Sarah Thwaites
 Updated: May 21, 2024 3:26 pm
 Posted: Apr 26, 2024 2:30 pm
 It’s been over six years since the Nintendo Switch launched in 2017, and after a long and successful reign, you may be wondering what new piece of hardware will be next. We’ve seen updates to the current switch with the OLED and Lite models, though we’re still in the dark on what Nintendo’s next-gen offering could be.
 

 After becoming the 3rd best-selling console in history this year, it’s fair to say that Nintendo might want to keep things close to its chest. Yet, even with all the secrecy surrounding the possibility of a new Nintendo Switch, we’ve collected all the details we could find about the mystery follow-up ahead of its eventual official announcement and release.
 

 Nintendo Switch 2 Release Date - Latest News
 While Nintendo hasn’t yet announced any official follow-up to their incredibly successful Nintendo Switch console, there are enough rumors swirling about to make us believe that the next Nintendo console will arrive sometime in 2025 rather than 2024.
 

 In February 2024, the Japanese publication Nikkei suggested that the proposed Nintendo Switch 2 would launch in March 2025 at the earliest, contradicting previous reports. While the article covered information we’ve heard before, like the proposed iterative design scheme, Nikkei did add that the 2025 date was likely due to the company stockpiling consoles to avoid scalping at launch. As any long-term Nintendo fan knows, procuring one of the company’s new consoles can be tricky business. Those who tried will remember how difficult it was to secure a Nintendo Switch at launch in 2017, with the console suffering from inflated pricing on the aftermarket due to crafty resellers.
 

 Adding to the intrigue about a potential date change, it looks like Nintendo won’t be exhibiting at this year’s Gamescom, an annual trade fair held in Cologne, Germany. As reported by GamesIndustry.biz, a representative of Nintendo of Europe issued a statement to the German outlet Games Wirtschaft, confirming the news. The statement reads, "Gamescom is a central event in Nintendo's event calendar. This year, however, after careful consideration, we decided against taking part in Cologne. Instead, players can try out the games for Nintendo Switch as part of other Germany-wide events." This decision, while not unprecedented for major players - PlayStation also missed the event in 2022 and 2023 - does raise the question of what we can expect from Nintendo in the latter half of 2024. Could this be a sign of a major announcement coming or a strategic shift in their marketing approach? Only time will tell.
 

 

 

 Nintendo’s president, Shuntaro Furukawa, confirmed in an interview with Nikkei, and translated by VGC, that Nintendo will support the current-gen Switch until at least March 2025. This sentiment is also backed up by previous comments Furukawa made regarding the future of the Nintendo Switch in a financial briefing Q&A in 2022. In this interview, he committed to focusing on “building long-term relationships with our consumers (through Nintendo Accounts)," he went on to reiterate ", While continuing to release new Nintendo Switch software for consumers to enjoy, we aim to maintain relationships across hardware generations through services that utilize Nintendo Accounts and by providing opportunities for them to experience our IP through other non-gaming channels."
 

 Even with all the juicy gossip, it’s best not to hold your breath on what’s coming from the Japanese tech titan’s next console until there is an official announcement; fingers crossed we’ll get that confirmation soon.
 

 Nintendo Switch 2 Price
 There are plenty of Nintendo Switch models to consider while shopping right now, with pricing shifting dramatically depending on the version you’re looking to invest in. Looking forward to a potential Switch 2, inflation and internal specs, amongst other variables, will likely play a part in what we’ll pay for a new console at launch.
 

 It’s hard to know what the pricing of this mystery device will be, but we’ve listed the RRP of the current range of Nintendo Switch models as a reference:
 

 Nintendo Switch Lite: $199.99
 Nintendo Switch: $299.99
 Nintendo Switch OLED: $349.99
 Nintendo Switch 2 Models
 With the range of Nintendo Switch consoles currently on the market, you may be left wondering if you’ll have the same number of choices to pick between when the next iteration rolls around.
 

 The latest Nintendo Switch OLED model features a remarkable screen, and it feels like the future of the console, it being the most recent edition to Nintendo’s lineup. However, according to a VGC report, the next-gen Nintendo Switch may potentially feature an LCD screen instead.
 

 The current array of Nintendo Switch models are numerous and were released over the console’s multi-year lifespan, so it’s reasonable to believe there may be several versions of a potential Nintendo Switch follow-up, too.
 

 

 

 Nintendo Switch Design - What Will the Nintendo Switch 2 Look Like?
 There isn’t a lot of information on how Nintendo’s next-gen console will look, though there are plenty of features in the current-gen Nintendo Switch we’d love to see return for a follow-up console.
 

 VGC reported that development kits for the potential new console are already with partner studios, with sources citing some returning features. According to VGC’s report, the new Nintendo Switch could keep the portability of its predecessor and feature a cartridge slot for physical games.
 

 In May 2023, a patent was filed with the United States Patent Office and published in September, which suggests a potential revamped Joy-Con controller that would hopefully help with the notorious Joy-Con drift issue associated with the Nintendo Switch.
 

 The patent details a magnetic field for controls rather than the plastic circuit boards seen in the current generation console. However, it’s worth mentioning that patents don’t necessarily translate directly to future products, so there’s no guarantee on whether the Nintendo Switch 2 will feature updated Joy-Cons, and we’ll have to wait for official word from Nintendo on that front.
 

 Will the Nintendo Switch 2 be Backwards Compatible?
 As rumors swirl about the possibility of a Nintendo Switch 2, the question of backwards compatibility is naturally on everyone's lips. In the absence of any official reveals, there isn’t much to go on at this time. However, in a recent interview with Inverse, the aptly named Nintendo of America president, Doug Bowser, alluded to the future of the brand’s approach to software.
 

 While Bowser opted to deny commenting on anything related to the rumored console, he did talk about the Nintendo Account system that players’ digital libraries are currently tied to on the Nintendo Switch. “In the past, every device we transitioned to had a whole new account system. Creating the Nintendo Account will allow us to communicate with our players if and when we make a transition to a new platform, to help ease that process or transition.” This dedication to the Nintendo Account model could suggest that all of our favorite Nintendo Switch games may work on the company’s next console whenever it lands. Regardless, given the precious little that we know right now, we’ll have to take this information with a pinch of salt and not get ahead of ourselves.
 

 As it stands now, it is unclear whether or not Nintendo Switch accessories will be compatible with the new model either. It's possible that all of your Nintendo Switch controllers will work with the new console, but we don't yet know.