Digitizing Glass Plate Photography
 Digitization refers to the process of creating digital images of physical items, yet this process requires many steps. And while the equipment needed for digitizing glass photographs exists in a variety of price points, the basic tenets remain the same: imaging, editing, describing (with metadata), archiving, and sharing.
 Imaging
 To image glass photographs, it is necessary to have a camera and a light source, as glass photographs must be backlit to render the images visible. Best practices recommend a flat lightboard for consistent illumination, a camera copy stand, and a camera with focus peaking and aperture priority to achieve the highest quality images. For the lightboard, also known as a light table, it is recommended to use one with a coloring rendering index of 90+ and 5000-5500k light temperature. Cameras should be mounted to the copy stand with overhead mounts to ensure consistent imaging; best practice is to use a level to ensure the camera and light table are parallel to each other.
 Editing
 While editing images for commercial or marketing practices is acceptable, editing photographs of physical items for archival purposes is typically not recommended. To edit the images for archival purposes, it is best practice to make only minimal adjustments, such as converting negatives to positives. For copies of the digitized images to be used for marketing purposes, etc., it is acceptable to edit the contrast, exposure, brightness, etc. or to touchup breaks in the glass or emulsion. It is also acceptable at this phase to add watermarks or logos to copies of the digitized images, however this should again only be done with non-archival copies of the images.
 Description—Metadata
 The metadata for glass photographs may come in the form of supplemental materials; institutional, personal, or expert knowledge; or may even be on the plates themselves, written onto the paper edgings or directly on the glass. Metadata from this information can be created for the entire collection, specific boxes or containers, individual images, or a combination thereof. This information not only helps users in the search and discovery phases of seeking digitized images, but it also helps organize and adds context and provenance to digital images.
 Workflows for adding metadata vary. Some prefer to work with the metadata after the glass photographs are imaged, while others prefer to have the metadata completely organized before imaging. The timing of metadata inclusion must be made by considering the conditions of the glass photographs and their storage facilities, the level of metadata available, and the availability of staff dedicated to the process. The best way to add metadata to digitized images is to use a program that embeds metadata within the image. This guarantees that the metadata is always connected to the image and can be extracted from the EXIF data. Adobe Lightroom and similar programs can perform this function. In addition, it is also helpful to keep local files, software, or databases that detail the metadata associated with the images in the glass photographs.
 Storage—Digital Archives
 To archive the digitized images, it is important to follow the 3-2-1 digital preservation standard by saving three copies of every digital image, in two different file formats, with one copy saved in a different location. RAW or TIFF file types are best for long-term storage because they are less prone to bit-rot and therefore less likely to degrade over time. Uncompressed TIFF files are typically quite large, which allows for printing at considerable scale without pixelating, however they also take up much more storage space. These file formats are typically best saved in rarely used storage locations, as their size slows down most computing processes, and the full-size uncompressed images are not frequently needed for everyday use. In practice, the authors have found it best to take the initial images of the glass plates in RAW format, and then save additional copies in compressed file formats. Commonly used compressed file formats include JPEG and PNG. These files are smaller and load faster on websites and computers, which allows for easier shared use.
 Sharing
 Finally, it is important to share digitized images of glass photographs, both to educate others on the unique existence of these items while also limiting contact and handling. For the authors, sharing digitized images and the standards for doing so are the key additions to the updated literature on best practices for glass photographs. Much of the previous literature was written at least a decade ago, and much has changed in the information and communication technology landscape in that time.
 For glass photograph imaging projects, it is necessary to create multiple points of access to the visual and historical information obtained from these glass plates. Publishing collection information in multimedia form creates a rich resource for researchers and specialists. Images accompanying textual records enhance the collections for audiences of different ages and interests across the world and create a basic resource for interpretative applications to be built on. Work in digital humanities, digital archives, and museum informatics can attest to the audience for and varied applications of these materials.
 Through the digitization of cultural collections, these resources can be used for multiple purposes, including educational and interpretive research. Digitized collections allow viewers to zoom in and examine details of glass photographs which would not otherwise be seen in a display case or by the naked eye. For cultural institutions, digitization offers the ability to display an entire collection, as large parts of it would not typically be on public display, and to reach those who cannot visit in person. Other benefits include the ability to adjust interpretative applications for users with disabilities or special needs.
 While social media sites are a natural place to promote such images, they should be used as a secondary location. Best practices recommend a primary location for all images to be shared with the public, such as a website, digital asset management system (DAMS), database with a strong graphical user interface (GUI), or dedicated photo storage site such as Flickr. With new technologies and protocols for database searching, the importance of cultural institutions offering digital access to their collections allows for the possibility of cross-collection and cross-institutional searching.