Bills in the 116th Congress
Legislation Commissioning Agency Analyses
In January 2019, the House passed three bills that would commission studies concerning the use
of virtual currencies for illicit purposes. H.R. 56, the Financial Technology Protection Act, would
establish an Independent Financial Technology Task Force to Combat Terrorism and Illicit
Financing (Task Force) led by the Treasury Secretary.98 The bill would direct the Task Force to
(1) “conduct independent research on terrorist and illicit use of new financial technologies,
including digital currencies,” and (2) “develop legislative and regulatory proposals to improve
counter-terrorist and counter-illicit financing efforts.”
99 H.R. 56 would further require the Task
Force to annually report its findings to Congress.100 The bill would also establish two programs to
incentivize members of the public to assist the federal government’s efforts to combat the illicit
use of virtual currencies. First, the bill would direct the Treasury Secretary to establish a reward
of up to $450,000 for persons who “provide[] information leading to the conviction of an
individual involved with terrorist use of digital currencies.”
101 Second, the bill would direct the
Treasury Secretary to create a grant program “for the development of tools and programs to detect
terrorist and illicit use of digital currencies.”102 After passing the House in January 2019, H.R. 56
was referred to the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
A second bill, H.R. 428, the Homeland Security Assessment of Terrorists’ Use of Virtual
Currencies Act, would similarly commission an analysis of the use of virtual currencies by
terrorists.
103 Specifically, H.R. 428 would direct the Under Secretary of Homeland Security for
Intelligence and Analysis to conduct a “threat assessment” analyzing “the actual and potential
threat posed by individuals using virtual currency to carry out activities in furtherance of an act of
terrorism, including the provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist 
organization.”
104 After passing the House in January 2019, H.R. 428 was referred to the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.
Finally, H.R. 502, the Fight Illicit Networks and Detect Trafficking Act (the FIND Trafficking
Act), would direct the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to conduct a study “on how
virtual currencies and online marketplaces are used to facilitate sex and drug trafficking.”
105 The
bill would require GAO to provide Congress with a report summarizing the results of the study,
together with any recommendations for legislative or regulatory action that would assist the
federal government in combatting the use of virtual currencies to facilitate sex and drug
trafficking.106 After passing the House in January 2019, H.R. 56 was referred to the Senate
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
H.R. 1414, FinCEN Improvement Act of 2019
In March 2019, the House passed H.R. 1414, the FinCEN Improvement Act of 2019.107 The bill
would, among other things, clarify that FinCEN’s statutory power to coordinate with foreign
financial intelligence units on antiterrorism and AML initiatives108
“includ[es] matters involving
emerging technologies or value that substitutes for currency.”
109 After passing the House in March
2019, H.R. 1414 was referred to the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
H.R. 528, Blockchain Regulatory Certainty Act
In January 2019, H.R. 528, the Blockchain Regulatory Certainty Act, was introduced in the
House of Representatives.
110 The bill would create a safe harbor from federal and state money
transmitter licensing and registration requirements for certain blockchain developers. Specifically,
the bill would provide that noncontrolling “blockchain developers” and providers of a
“blockchain service” shall not be treated as “money transmitters,” MSBs, “or any other State or
Federal legal designation[s] requiring licensing or registration as a condition to acting as a
blockchain developer or provider of a blockchain service.”
111 A blockchain developer or provider
of a blockchain service would qualify as a noncontrolling developer or provider as long as it does
not have control over users’ digital currency in the regular course of business.112 Some
commentators have argued that such a safe harbor is necessary to provide legal certainty to actors
in the virtual currency space, including persons who contribute code to virtual currency platforms
or develop blockchain-related software but do not take custody of others’ virtual currency.
113
However, another commentator has noted that it is “debat[able]” whether federal registration
requirements apply to such persons.
114 H.R. 528 was referred to the House Committee on
Financial Services and the House Committee on the Judiciary in January 2019.