Definition/Introduction
 The Somogyi effect, also known as the "chronic Somogyi rebound" or "posthypoglycemic hyperglycemia," was a theory proposed in the 1930s by Dr. Michael Somogyi, a Hungarian-born professor at Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States.[1] He described the paradoxical tendency of the body to react to hypoglycemia by producing hyperglycemia. Somogyi proposed that when blood glucose levels drop too low during the late evening, activation of counterregulatory hormones such as adrenaline, corticosteroids, growth hormone, and glucagon may be observed, leading to activation of gluconeogenesis and resultant hyperglycemia in the early morning.[2]
 

 However, more recent studies involving continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) have disputed this theory. Also, clinicians have observed that patients with early morning hyperglycemia tend to have high blood glucose measurements at night rather than low.[1] As a result, the debate continues in the scientific community regarding Somogyi's theory. Moreover, recently proposed mechanisms of morning hyperglycemia include nocturnal growth hormone secretion, hypoinsulinemia, and insulin resistance associated with metabolic syndrome.[3]
 

 A phenomenon known as the dawn phenomenon was introduced by Dr. Schimdt in the 1980s, stating that morning hyperglycemia is due to the decreased levels of endogenous insulin secreted at night.[1] The dawn phenomenon also contributes to morning hyperglycemia to increased concentrations of insulin-antagonist hormones. The dawn phenomenon is comparable to the Somogyi phenomenon, which attributes morning hyperglycemia to counterregulatory hormones from low glucose. The dawn phenomenon has been noted to occur more commonly than the Somogyi phenomenon.[1] While the two theories are not seen in all cases of insulin-dependent diabetics, it is important to note that the best way to prevent either is optimal diabetes control with the proper insulin therapy.[1]
 

 The Somogyi phenomenon states that early morning hyperglycemia occurs due to a rebound effect from late-night hypoglycemia. However, the dawn phenomenon does not include hypoglycemic episodes to be a factor.
 

 Insulin Release and Insulin Resistance
 

 With recent studies attributing early morning hyperglycemia to hypoinsulinemia, there is an observable pattern in which the body secretes insulin. The theory is insulin gets secreted in a circadian pattern, with the lowest concentrations between midnight and 6 AM and the highest concentrations between noon and 6 PM.[4] This pattern of insulin secretion is the opposite of melatonin from the pineal gland. The circadian pattern of insulin secretion provides evidence for the dawn phenomenon.
 

 The Somogyi phenomenon has been a proposed phenomenon in insulin-dependent diabetic patients. The thinking is that these patients should monitor their blood glucose levels and adjust insulin dosages as necessary to prevent hypo- or hyperglycemic episodes.
 

 In an individual that does not have diabetes, the blood glucose and insulin concentrations stay flat and constant throughout the night, with a transient increase in insulin just before dawn to prevent hepatic glucose production through gluconeogenesis and prevent hyperglycemia.[5] This explains why non-diabetic patients do not exhibit the dawn phenomenon, as their insulin levels follow the circadian pattern necessary for optimal glucose control.
 

 Insulin resistance, seen in diabetes or metabolic syndrome, has been associated with constant exposure to high insulin levels.[6] As patients get diagnosed with diabetes or metabolic syndrome at an earlier age, there is more exogenous insulin exposure that leads to this resistance. Because of this, the normal regulation and pattern of insulin levels make it difficult for insulin-dependent diabetics to control their blood glucose levels during their sleep. Not only is insulin necessary to regulate glucose levels, but it is also the primary hormone that inhibits gluconeogenesis.[7] Gluconeogenesis in the morning gets inhibited in a non-diabetic due to the transient increase in insulin right before dawn. As a patient becomes more and more resistant to insulin, the key inhibitor of gluconeogenesis is no longer working; this allows the body to produce more glucose, leading to a hyperglycemic state.
 

 Clinical Significance
 The Somogyi phenomenon had been considered in the past; an essential consideration for the proper diagnosis and management of blood glucose levels is vital for the body’s metabolic demands. The post-hypoglycemic hyperglycemia raises the question of whether a patient’s insulin levels should be adjusted in the evening to prevent hyperglycemia in the morning. As this is something ideally avoided, the Somogyi phenomenon occurs too infrequently to make this standardized practice.