This Committee Report provides additional direction and 
 specificity on the uses of funds provided in this bill. During 
 fiscal year 2025, for the purposes of the Balanced Budget and 
 Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, as amended, with respect 
 to appropriations contained in the accompanying bill, the terms 
 ``program, project, and activity'' [PPA] shall mean any item 
 for which a dollar amount is contained in appropriations acts 
 (including joint resolutions providing continuing 
 appropriations) or accompanying reports of the House and Senate 
 Committees on Appropriations, or accompanying conference 
 reports and joint explanatory statements of the committee of 
 conference. The Committee continues longstanding reprogramming 
 requirements and limitations regarding changes to funding for 
 PPAs. The Committee expects agencies to submit any 
 reprogramming requests in compliance with requirements of this 
 act and to provide a thorough explanation of the proposed 
 reallocations, including a detailed justification of increases 
 and reductions. The Committee expects each agency to manage the 
 expenditures of its programs and activities to remain within 
 the amounts appropriated by Congress.
  The Committee also continues the longstanding requirement 
 that each agency submit an operating plan to the House and 
 Senate Committees on Appropriations not later than 45 days 
 after enactment of this act, in order to establish the baseline 
 for application of reprogramming and transfer authorities 
 provided in this act. The operating plan should include at 
 minimum funding for PPAs as specified above.
  The Committee reminds agencies funded by this act of their 
 obligation to uphold the Federal trust and treaty 
 responsibilities to Tribes and Federal obligations to the 
 Native Hawaiian Community. This includes upholding treaty and 
 reserved rights, and any other rights and obligations under 
 Federal law; supporting self-determination efforts by Native 
 communities; fulfilling obligations under Presidential 
 Memoranda and Executive Orders; and conducting early and robust 
 government-to-government consultation with Tribes, and 
 meaningful outreach and engagement with Native Hawaiians.
  The Committee also directs the Secretary of Education, 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, and Secretary of Labor 
 to release public reports detailing how the Departments are 
 addressing antisemitism, including by implementing the National 
 Strategy to Counter Antisemitism.
  The Committee directs the Secretary of Education, Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services, and Secretary of Labor to brief 
 the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations no later than 
 90 days after enactment of this act regarding any strategic 
 plans developed by the Department over the three prior fiscal 
 years outlining the ways that the Department has promoted voter 
 registration, and voter participation.
  The Committee is encouraged by the General Services 
 Administration's Bulletin FMR C-2024-01, ``Safety Station 
 Program Guidelines in Federal Facilities'' that was issued on 
 December 21, 2023. The Committee encourages all Departments 
 covered in this act to implement these guidelines and establish 
 safety stations in each public building that include automated 
 external defibrillators, opioid reversal agents, and 
 hemorrhagic control programs and requests a briefing from each 
 Department within 90 days of enactment of this act on progress 
 towards implementing these guidelines.
  The Committee continues to appreciate the close working 
 relationship with the various budget offices of the agencies 
 funded in this bill. Maintaining these relationships is 
 critical for the Committee to perform its duties in both 
 developing these funding requirements and recommendations and 
 providing oversight over the execution of funds.