**Mattel: Overcoming Marketing and Manufacturing Challenges**

It all started in a California garage workshop when Ruth and Elliot Handler and Matt
Matson founded Mattel in 1945. The company started out making picture frames,
but the founders soon recognized the profitability of the toy industry and switched
their emphasis. Mattel became a publicly owned company in 1960, with sales exceeding
$100 million by 1965. Over the next 40 years, Mattel went on to become the world’s
largest toy company in terms of revenue. Today, Mattel, Inc. is a world leader in the
design, manufacture, and marketing of family products. Well-known for toy brands
such as Barbie, Fisher-Price, Disney, Hot Wheels, Matchbox, Tyco, Cabbage Patch Kids,
and board games such as Scrabble, the company boasts nearly $6 billion in annual
revenue. Headquartered in El Segundo, California, with offices in 36 countries, Mattel
markets its products in more than 150 nations.
In spite of its overall success, Mattel has had its share of losses over its history.
During the mid to late 1990s, Mattel lost millions due to declining sales and bad
business acquisitions. In January 1997, Jill Barad took over as Mattel’s CEO. Barad’s
management style was characterized as strict, and her tenure at the helm proved
challenging for many employees. Although Barad had been successful in building the
Barbie brand to $2 billion near the end of the twentieth century, growth slowed rapidly
after that time. Declining sales at outlets such as Toys ‘‘R’’ Us and the mismanaged
acquisition of The Learning Company marked the start of some difficulties for the toy
maker, including a dramatic 60 percent drop in stock price under Barad’s three-year
stint as CEO. Barad accepted responsibility for these problems and resigned in 2000.
The company soon installed Robert Eckert, a 23-year Kraft veteran, as chairman
and CEO. During Eckert’s first three years on the job, the company’s stock price
increased to over $20 per share, and Mattel was ranked fortieth on Business Week’s list
of top-performing companies. Implementing techniques used by consumer-product
companies, Eckert adopted a mission to bring stability and predictability to Mattel. He
sold unprofitable units, streamlined work processes, and improved relations with
retailers. Under Eckert, Mattel was granted the highly sought-after licensing agreement for products related to the Harry Potter series of books and movies. The company
continued to flourish and build its reputation, even earning the Corporate Responsibility Award from UNICEF in 2003. By 2008, Mattel had fully realized a turnaround
and was recognized as one of Fortune magazine’s ‘‘100 Best Companies to Work For’’
and Forbes magazine’s ‘‘100 Most Trustworthy U.S. Companies.’’
Mattel’s Core Products
Barbie
Among its many lines of popular toy products, Mattel is famous for owning top girls’
brands. In 1959, Mattel made the move that would establish them at the forefront of
the toy industry. After seeing her daughter’s fascination with cutout paper dolls, Ruth
suggested that a three-dimensional doll should be produced so that young girls could
live out their dreams and fantasies. This doll was named ‘‘Barbie,’’ the nickname of
Ruth and Elliot Handler’s daughter. The first Barbie doll sported open-toed shoes, a
ponytail, sunglasses, earrings, and a zebra-striped bathing suit. Fashions and accessories 
were also available for the doll. Although buyers at the annual Toy Fair in New
York took no interest in the Barbie doll, little girls of the time certainly did. The
intense demand seen at the retail stores was insufficiently met for several years. Mattel
just could not produce the Barbie dolls fast enough. Today, Barbie is Mattel’s flagship
brand and its number one seller—routinely accounting for approximately half of
Mattel’s sales revenue. This makes Barbie the best-selling fashion doll in most global
markets. The Barbie line today includes dolls, accessories, Barbie software, and a
broad assortment of licensed products such as books, apparel, food, home furnishings,
home electronics, and movies.
Although Barbie was introduced as a teenage fashion model, she has taken on
almost every possible profession. She has also acquired numerous male and female
friends and family over the years. Ken, Midge, Skipper, Christie, and others were
introduced from the mid-1960s on. The Barbie line has even seen a disabled friend in a
wheelchair: Share a Smile Becky. Barbie’s popularity has even broken stereotypes.
Retrofitted versions of Barbie dolls, on sale in select San Francisco stores, feature
‘‘Hooker’’ Barbie, ‘‘Trailer Trash’’ Barbie, and ‘‘Drag Queen’’ Barbie. There are also
numerous ‘‘alternative’’ Barbies, such as ‘‘Big Dyke’’ Barbie, but Mattel does not want
the Barbie name to be used in these sales. Redressed and accessorized Barbies are okay
with Mattel as long as no one practices trademark infringement.
Barbie’s Popularity Slips Although Barbie remains a blockbuster by any standard,
Barbie’s popularity has slipped over the past decade. There are two major reasons for
Barbie’s slump. First, the changing lifestyles of today’s young girls are a concern for
Mattel. Many young girls prefer to spend time with music, movies, or the Internet than
play with traditional toys like dolls. Second, Barbie has suffered at the hands of new
and innovative competition, including the Bratz doll line that gained significant
market share during the early 2000s. The dolls, which featured contemporary, ethnic
designs and skimpy clothes, were a stark contrast to Barbie and an immediate hit with
young girls. In an attempt to recover, Mattel introduced the new line of My Scene dolls
aimed at ‘‘tweens.’’ These dolls are trendier, look younger, and are considered to be
more hip for this age group who is on the cusp of outgrowing playing with dolls.
A website (http://www.myscene.com) engages girls in a variety of fun, engaging, and
promotional activities.
Barbie’s Legal Battle with MGA Entertainment Since 2004, Mattel has been embroiled
in a bitter intellectual property battle with former employee Carter Bryant and MGA
Entertainment, Inc., over rights to MGA’s popular Bratz dolls. Carter Bryant, an onagain/off-again Mattel employee, designed the Bratz dolls and pitched them to MGA. A
few months after the pitch, Bryant left Mattel to work at MGA, which began producing
Bratz in 2001. In 2002, Mattel launched an investigation into whether Bryant had
designed the Bratz dolls while employed with Mattel. After two years of investigation,
Mattel sued Bryant. A year later MGA fired off a suit of its own, claiming that Mattel’s
My Scene dolls were an attempt to copy the Bratz line. Mattel answered by expanding
its own lawsuit to include MGA and its CEO, Isaac Larian.
For decades, Barbie had reigned supreme in the doll market. However, Bratz dolls
gave Barbie a run for her money. In 2005, four years after the brand’s debut, Bratz
sales were at $2 billion. By 2009, Barbie’s worldwide sales had fallen by 15 percent,
although Bratz was not immune to sluggish sales either once consumers began to cut
back on spending during the 2008–2009 recession.
Much evidence points toward Bryant having conceived of Bratz dolls while at
Mattel. Four years after the initial suit was filed, Bryant settled with Mattel under an
undisclosed set of terms. However, although some decisions were made, the battle
between Mattel and MGA has continued. In July 2008, a jury deemed MGA and its
CEO liable for what it termed ‘‘intentional interference’’ regarding Bryant’s contract
with Mattel. In August 2008, Mattel received damages of $100 million. Although
Mattel first requested damages of $1.8 billion, the company was pleased with the
principle behind the victory. MGA is appealing the decision.
In December 2008, Mattel appeared to win another victory when a California
judge banned MGA from making or selling Bratz dolls. The decision was devastating
to the Bratz line, as retailers have avoided the brand in anticipation of Mattel’s takeover. 
Many industry analysts, however, expect Mattel to work out a deal with MGA in
which MGA can continue to sell Bratz dolls as long as Mattel shares in the profits.
MGA plans to appeal the court ruling. Whatever the outcome, Mattel has managed to
gain some control over Barbie’s toughest competition.
American Girl
In 1998, Mattel acquired Pleasant Company, maker of the American Girl collection—a
well-known line of historical dolls, books, and accessories. Originally, American Girl
products were sold exclusively through catalogs. Mattel extended that base by selling
American Girl accessories (not the dolls) in major chain stores like Walmart and
Target. More recent efforts to increase brand awareness include the opening of
American Girl Place shops in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Atlanta, Dallas, Boston,
and Minneapolis. The New York store features three floors of dolls, accessories, and
books in the heart of the 5th Avenue shopping district. The store also offers a cafe
where girls can dine with their dolls and a stage production where young actresses
bring American Girl stories to life.
The American Girl collection is wildly popular with girls in the 7- to 12-year-old
demographic. The dolls have a wholesome and educational image—the antithesis to
Barbie. This move by Mattel represented a long-term strategy to reduce reliance on
traditional products and to take away the stigma surrounding the ‘‘perfect image’’ of
Barbie. Each American Girl doll lives during a specific time in American history, and
all have stories that describe the hardships they face while maturing into young adults.
For example, Felicity’s stories describe life in 1774 just prior to the Revolutionary
War. Likewise, Josephina lives in New Mexico in 1824 during the rapid growth of the
American West. Other dolls include Kaya (a Native American girl growing up in
1764), Elizabeth (Colonial Virginia), Kirsten (pioneer life in 1854), Addy (1864
during the Civil War), Samantha and Nellie (1904 New York), Kit (1934 during the
Great Depression), Molly (1944 during World War II), and Emily (a British girl who
comes to America during World War II). The American Girl brand includes several
book series, accessories, clothing for dolls and girls, and a magazine that ranks in the
top 10 American children’s magazines.
Hot Wheels
Hot Wheels roared into the toy world in 1968. More than 40 years later, the brand is
hotter than ever and includes high-end collectibles, NASCAR (National Association
for Stock Car Auto Racing) and Formula One models for adults, high-performance
cars, track sets, and play sets for children of all ages. The brand is connected with
racing circuits worldwide. More than 15 million boys ages 5 to 15 are avid
collectors, each owning an average of 41 cars. 