Background on the 2024 Farmworker Protection Rule
DOL indicates that the purpose of the Farmworker Protection Rule is to strengthen “protections for
agricultural workers,” enhance the agency’s “capabilities to monitor H-2A program compliance and take
necessary enforcement actions against program violators,” and ensure that “hiring H-2A workers does not
adversely affect the wages and working conditions of similarly employed workers” in the United States.
The rule amends existing regulations and includes provisions that encompass six areas: (1) “protections
for worker voice and empowerment,” (2) “clarification of termination for cause,” (3) “immediate effective
date for updated adverse effect wage rate,” (4) “enhanced transparency for job opportunity and foreign
labor recruitment,” (5) “enhanced transparency and protections for agricultural workers,” and (6)
“enhanced integrity and enforcement capabilities.”
In the pending litigation, the first set of provisions, i.e., “protections for worker voice and empowerment”
is most relevant. This set revises 20 C.F.R. § 655.135(h) and adds two new subsections, (m) and (n). DOL
has stated that these provisions aim to protect H-2A workers by “explicitly protecting certain activities all
workers must be able to engage in without fear of intimidation, threats, and other forms of retaliation”;
safeguarding “collective action and concerted activity for mutual aid and protection”; allowing workers to
decline to listen to “employer speech regarding protected activities without fear of retaliation”; permitting
workers to “designate a representative of their choosing in certain interviews”; and authorizing workers to
“invite or accept guests to worker housing.” The rule states that it “does not require employers to
recognize labor organizations or to engage in any collective bargaining activities such as those that may
be required by the [National Labor Relations Act].” The National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) is a law
that gives collective bargaining rights to workers who qualify as “employees” under the definition in the
statute. The NLRA explicitly excludes agricultural workers from the definition of “employee.”
Kansas v. U.S. Department of Labor
On June 10, 2024, Kansas and 16 other states, a trade association of growers, and a private farm filed a
complaint against DOL in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Georgia, arguing, among
other things, that the Farmworker Protection Rule violates the NLRA because it gives H-2A agricultural
workers collective bargaining rights when the NLRA explicitly excludes agricultural workers from having
those rights. The plaintiffs subsequently filed a motion for a preliminary injunction and temporary
restraining order seeking a stay of the effective date of the Farmworker Protection Rule or, in the
alternative, a temporary restraining order until the court grants an injunction. The court held a hearing on
the motion on August 2, 2024, and on August 26, 2024, the federal district court judge granted the
plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction.
Plaintiffs’ Arguments
The arguments below were raised in the plaintiffs’ motion for preliminary injunction. This Sidebar does
not cover every argument the plaintiffs advanced.
The Rule Violates the NLRA
The plaintiffs argued that the rule is not in accordance with existing law and that DOL is providing
collective bargaining protection to H-2A workers. According to the plaintiffs, parts of the rule are almost
a direct copy of certain provisions in the NLRA, such as those regarding unfair labor practices and
representatives and elections. The plaintiffs acknowledged that the rule does not expressly declare that H2A workers have a right to unionize and collectively bargain, but they claim that the protections conferred
by the rule effectively confer such rights in contravention of the NLRA.
The Rule Exceeds DOL’s Authority Under the INA
The plaintiffs also argued that DOL has very limited authority to issue regulations under 8 U.S.C. § 1188.
Specifically, the plaintiffs state that Section 1188(a), which is the part of the statute DOL relied on to
promulgate the rule, is being misinterpreted by the agency. According to the plaintiffs, DOL is supposed
to neutralize any adverse effects from an influx of H-2A workers and not necessarily take affirmative
steps to improve the working conditions for H-2A workers. In addition, according to the plaintiffs,
Section 1188(a) does not explicitly give DOL rulemaking authority.
The plaintiffs filed this lawsuit before the Supreme Court’s decision in Loper Bright Enterprises v.
Raimondo, which overturned the Chevron doctrine. The Chevron doctrine directed courts to defer to an
agency’s reasonable interpretation of ambiguous statutes the agency administers. The plaintiffs argued
that because Congress’s intent was clear in 8 U.S.C. § 1188, DOL was not entitled to Chevron deference.
Relatedly, the plaintiffs pointed out that DOL relies on caselaw that existed before the Supreme Court
overruled the Chevron doctrine rather than on the statute itself.
DOL’s Arguments
The arguments below were raised in DOL’s response to the plaintiffs’ motion for preliminary injunction.
This Sidebar does not cover every argument DOL advanced.
The Rule Does Not Violate the NLRA
In summary, DOL argued that the rule does not require employers to recognize unions or engage in
collective bargaining and is therefore not in violation of the NLRA. According to DOL, the rule expands
on existing H-2A anti-discrimination provisions, and individuals who fall outside the NLRA’s definition
of “employee” can still be protected by other statutes and regulations. DOL states that the rule does just
that by granting protections to those not covered by the NLRA. Finally, DOL argues that the rule and the
NLRA do not conflict with one another.
The Rule Is a Proper Exercise of DOL’s Statutory Obligation
DOL responded to the plaintiffs’ argument that the rule exceeded its authority by stating that the INA
grants it rulemaking authority. DOL pointed out that provisions in 8 U.S.C. § 1188 expressly reference
DOL regulations and that Congress authorized it to implement the mission of the statute through
regulation. Further, DOL argued that H-2A workers will become more attractive to U.S. employers if they
receive fewer protections than U.S. workers and that this in turn will “adversely affect” U.S. workers. The
goal of the rule, according to DOL, is to place H-2A workers on similar footing as U.S. workers to prevent an adverse effect in the long run. Lastly, DOL maintained that it has historically understood the
“adverse effect” requirement “as requiring parity between the terms and conditions of employment
provided to H-2A workers ... and as establishing a baseline ‘acceptable’ standard for working conditions
below which [U.S. workers] would be adversely affected.”
DOL filed its response after the Supreme Court announced the overruling of Chevron in Loper Bright
Enterprises. Citing Loper Bright Enterprises in a footnote, DOL argued that the best reading of Section
1188 was that Congress had delegated to DOL broad, discretionary authority to take action to prevent
adverse effects to workers in the United States. The agency claimed that the rule is an appropriate
exercise of this discretionary authority, including because the rule “ensures that agricultural employers
cannot use the H-2A workforce to undermine workers in the United States who seek better wages and
working conditions.”