Financing Uncertainty
As is the case with commercial casinos, some tribal operations that expanded in recent years have had difficulty meeting or restructuring debt obligations. The Mashantucket Pequot Nation, which operates the Foxwoods casino, defaulted in 2009 and completed the restructuring of its debt of $2 billion on July 1, 2013.81 According to recent news reports, Foxwoods remains in a precarious financial position, with outstanding loans of around $1.7 billion.82 The Mohegan Tribal Gaming Authority, which refinanced $1.64 billion of long term debt in March 2012, announced layoffs involving hundreds of employees at the Mohegan Sun in several years since then.83 Because tribes are sovereign nations, there are emerging complications for lenders. For example, the Mohegan tribe’s constitution gives its Gaming Disputes Court, made up of a trial court and an appeals court, exclusive jurisdiction over disputes involving gambling. The Mohegan Sun 2015 Annual Report spelled out some of the potential legal issues:
We, the Tribe and our wholly-owned subsidiaries may not be subject to, or permitted to seek protection under, the federal bankruptcy laws since an Indian tribe and we, as an instrumentality of the Tribe, may not be a “person” eligible to be a debtor under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Therefore, our creditors may not be able to seek liquidation of our assets or other action under federal bankruptcy laws. Also, the Gaming Disputes Court may lack powers typically associated with a federal bankruptcy court, such as the power to non-consensually alter liabilities, direct the priority of creditors’ payments and liquidate certain assets. The Gaming Disputes Court is a court of limited jurisdiction and may not have jurisdiction over all creditors of ours or our subsidiaries or over all of the territory in which we and our subsidiaries carry on business.84
An ongoing dispute between Wells Fargo Bank and Saybrook Investors LLC, and Wisconsin’s Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians could affect gaming financing. Wells Fargo has sued the tribe over its failure to make monthly payments on a $50 million tribal bond to consolidate debt and invest in a riverboat casino operation in Mississippi. The U.S. District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin in 2010 found that the bond deal was invalid because it had not been reviewed by the National Indian Gaming Commission, as the court said was required under IGRA.85 The complicated and long running dispute has continued after a remand in September 2011 by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.86 It may take more years and possibly afew more appeals for a ruling on the validity of the bond documents other than the bond indenture.87
Pari Mutuel Betting
Legal in 43 states,88 pari mutuel betting is defined as “player banked betting with all the bets pooled and prizes awarded from the pool.”89 The most common examples in the United States are dog and horse racing and jai alai (a game played on a court with a ball and wicker racket), and other sporting events in which participants finish in ranked order.
In recent years, the industry has developed an extensive system of Internet and off track wagering. In 2000, Congress approved legislation to amend the definition of “interstate off track wager” in the Interstate Horseracing Act (15 U.S.C. §§3001 3007). Proponents claim the amendment permits tracks to accept bets online from individuals located in states where pari
mutuel betting is legal (although not necessarily where either off track or online betting is legal); the Department of Justice disagrees.90 A bill introduced in the 114th Congress, H.R. 707, would have clarified that the Wire Act and other laws do not apply to the Interstate Horseracing Act.
Despite the legal uncertainty, interstate pari mutuel betting with remote devices is growing through the use of advance deposit wagering (ADW). Players first set up accounts with companies such as Twinspires (owned by the Churchill Downs racetrack), Xpressbet, or TV Games Network. They then use the accounts to place bets on races over the phone, on a computer, with mobile devices, or with set top remote control devices linked to television channels that broadcast horse racing. The Oregon Racing Commission, which licenses and audits many of the largest firms taking advance deposit wagers, reports that online wagering via its licensed companies rose to $2.9 billion in 2015, from $962 million in 2005.91
Sports Betting
Congress in 1992 passed the Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act (PASPA; P.L. 102
559) with strong support from the National Basketball Association, the National Football League (NFL), Major League Baseball, the National Hockey League, and the National Collegiate Athletic Association, among others. The law generally barred state governments from licensing, sponsoring, operating, advertising, promoting, or engaging in sports gambling.92 It contained exceptions for Nevada, Oregon, Delaware, and Montana, each of which allowed certain types ofsports betting at the time of passage.93 New Jersey failed to pass legislation in time to qualify for the PASPA exemption. Currently, Nevada is the only state to permit wagers on a full complement of sporting events and leagues.94 According to the University of Nevada, Las Vegas Center for Gaming Research, casino goers in Nevada wagered about $4.2 billion on sporting events in 2015, a rise from $3.4 billion in 2012.95
Delaware, which allowed only limited multigame or parlay betting96 on NFL contests at the time the 1992 law was passed, enacted a law in 2009 to create a state sports lottery. The NFL and other sports leagues challenged the law, and the U.S. Third Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the state was limited to offering narrow betting, similar to what existed in 1992. The U.S. Supreme Court in May 2010 declined to hear an appeal, effectively ending Delaware’s effort to expand sports betting.97 After its voters authorized sports betting at casinos and racetracks in 2011, New Jersey mounted other court challenges to the constitutionality of PASPA.98 In February 2016, the U.S. Third Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that New Jersey’s sports wagering law conflicts with PASPA and could not be implemented.99 The Supreme Court may consider whether to hear New Jersey’s appeal of the lower court ruling.100 According to an estimate by AGA, Americans spent around $150 billion on illegal sports betting in 2015.101
Two bills have been introduced in the 114th Congress related to sports gambling. The New Jersey Betting and Equal Treatment Act of 2015 (H.R. 457) would expressly exempt New Jersey from PASPA. The Sports Gaming Opportunity Act (H.R. 416) would create an exemption from the PASPA prohibitions for any state that establishes sports gambling through laws enacted on or after January 1, 2015, and that go into effect no later than January 1, 2019.
Regulation of Internet Gambling
Federal Internet gambling legislation could benefit some sectors of the gambling industry more than others, depending on how it is crafted. State lottery officials, for example, have expressed concern that proposals that would give existing gambling establishments preference for online poker licenses could give those businesses an advantage in the market.102 By the same token, commercial casinos are worried that under the existing legal framework, online state lottery promotions, such as keno type games, could encroach on their turf. If the United States passes federal online gambling legislation and all states opt in during the next 12 months, H2 Gambling Capital predicts a U.S. online gambling market of $15 billion to $16 billion by 2021.103
Interest groups and gambling companies are at odds over remote gambling. One of the strongest proponents of legalized online poker is the Poker Players Alliance.104 Caesars Entertainment and MGM are among the large casino operators that have urged Congress to adopt federal legislation to regulate Internet gambling to avoid a patchwork of state regulations and different tax rates. These interests formed the Coalition for Consumer and Online Protection in 2014.105 Aligned against them are others, including most prominently the Coalition to Stop Internet Gambling.106 The North American Association of State and Provincial Lotteries (NASPL)107 and the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL)108 want individual states to have the right to legalize, license, and tax Internet gambling.109 In 2015, the National Council of Legislators from Gaming States (NCLGS) adopted a list of 10 policy standards for Internet gambling legislation addressing topics such as player protections, taxation, licensing, enforcement, payment processing, and geolocation standards.110 The National Governors Association largely echoes this view, and it has called on lawmakers to include state input before acting on any online gambling legislation.111
Many Indian tribes have declared their opposition to any federal gambling regime, although some of the larger tribes are now beginning to reverse their previous positions, viewing online gambling as a possible business opportunity.