Grey hydrogen and blue hydrogen The grey hydrogen considered in this study is produced by SMR technology, and the production starts with hydrogen purging with natural gas feedstock to break long hydrocarbon chains. This step is followed by sulphur removal by chemical absorption on a ZnO bed because even a small amount of sulphur present in natural gas poisons the catalyst. Then, methane is fed to the steam reformer together with steam. The subsequent reaction is a strongly endothermic reaction and produces a mixture containing hydrogen and carbon monoxide. The required steam is assumed to be produced from natural gas. Next, the produced syngas and steam go to a water gas shift reactor to produce more hydrogen and some carbon dioxide from the carbon monoxide. Subsequently, the pressure swing adsorbent (PSA) process is used to separate hydrogen and CO2 and the hydrogen is stored with a compression to 60 bar.19 Unrecovered hydrogen, methane, CO and other compounds go to the furnace to produce heat for the reformer.20 A study by Alhamdani et al. (2017) showed that the fugitive emission from the SMR process is equal to 0.004 kg CO2 eq. per kg H2 and does not have a major impact.21 In view of the low level of fugitive emissions, their effects are neglected in this study. An overview of a typical SMR process is given in Fig. 3. The production process for blue hydrogen is the same as that for grey hydrogen, except that carbon dioxide is captured from the plant, stored and sequestered as shown in Fig. 3.
 

 Fig. 3 Grey hydrogen (SMR) and blue hydrogen (SMR-CCS) production (modified from Petrescu et al., 2014).19
 2.3.2. Turquoise hydrogen TDM consumes less natural gas than SMR for hydrogen production and has lower total environmental impact.22 This superior environmental performance is because the TDM process does not release carbon dioxide to air. Moreover, since carbon dioxide is in a solid form, carbon gas cannot escape from the process, and a large amount of carbon dioxide can be captured with little impact on the environment. Typically, TDM is a form of pyrolysis of methane at a high temperature of 1500 K. There are two alternate routes in this process: one involving the use of a catalyst, which requires a lower temperature of around 1000 K, and the other without a catalyst, which requires a higher temperature of 1500 K.23 One of the advantages of pyrolysis of methane is that the only reaction products are hydrogen and solid carbon, thereby preventing the formation of CO2 during the reaction.24 Consequently, TDM is considered a promising alternative method for hydrogen production and can be seen in Fig. 4. The produced solid carbon can be utilised in many applications, such as chemical and industrial use.5 The benefit of using TDM is that it does not depend on CCS development and the infrastructure since the output carbon is in the solid form.25
 

 Fig. 4 Turquoise hydrogen (TDM) production (modified from Keipi et al., 2018).25
 2.3.3. Green hydrogen Electrolysis of water to split water into oxygen and hydrogen using renewable energy as an electricity source is currently considered the most promising method for carbon-free hydrogen production. Electrolyzers range in size from small apparatus-sized devices suitable for small-scale decentralized production of hydrogen to large centralized production facilities that could be directly connected to renewable or other zero-emission forms of electricity generation. A number of different electrolyzer types exist that operate on different principles: polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolyzers, alkaline electrolyzers and solid electrolyzers.26 An overview of the general process of water electrolysis for hydrogen production is given in Fig. 5. By-product oxygen from water hydrolysis can be used in combustion processes in the form of oxygen-enriched air to overcome mass transfer limitations and increase the flame speed and temperature.