Cryptocurrencies may be used to facilitate transactions and may be held as speculative
investments. Since 2009, when Satoshi Nakamoto launched the first cryptocurrency blockchain,
thousands of cryptocurrencies and different classes of other digital assets have emerged. This
section provides a non-exhaustive survey of various cryptocurrencies and some representative
features.
Cryptocurrencies
The term cryptocurrency generally refers to blockchain-based digital currencies maintained on
decentralized networks. For the purposes of this report, cryptocurrencies refers to a type of digital
asset. Stablecoins (see “Stablecoins” below) are a subset of cryptocurrency. Non-fungible tokens
and digital (or metaverse) real estate are other types of digital assets. They use similar technology
but are beyond the scope of this report. Other terms used synonymously with cryptocurrency are
crypto asset and tokens, among others. The term cryptocurrencies and citation of broad market
capitalization often include stablecoins (see “Stablecoins”), which have their own distinct set of
properties—most notably that they try to maintain a peg to some underlying asset.
The two most prevalent cryptocurrencies are Bitcoin and Ether, which combined represent around
61% of the entire crypto market.27 The cryptocurrency market, which consists of between 13,000
and 20,000 cryptocurrencies, according to industry tracking websites, has been characterized by
near constant and rapid price increases and price decreases.28 Most recently, after experiencing
exponential growth from 2020 to a record high of nearly $3 trillion in November 2021, the
market capitalization fell to less than $800 billion in November 2022. Bitcoin fell from nearly $69,000 to a two-year low of below $16,000 during this time.29 This trend has been referred to as
crypto winter. A host of cryptocurrency project and company failures in summer and fall 2022,
including the collapse of FTX, perhaps the most notable to date, were caused—and
exacerbated—by this broader market downturn.30 As of the time of this report, the total crypto
market capitalization is around $1 trillion.31
Bitcoin
Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency to gain widespread adoption. Bitcoin runs on a public
blockchain, secured by cryptography, and uses the proof of work consensus mechanism described
above to validate transactions. It also exhibits unique characteristics. For example, the mining and
hashing and use of Bitcoin block rewards creates a relationship intended to keep block mining
(approval) times roughly stable.32 The hashing complexity is intended to ensure block approval
rates of 10 minutes.33 If the number of miners or the computing capacity being used increases—
perhaps because the Bitcoin block reward induces more miners to compete or deploy more
advanced equipment—thus mining blocks faster than 10 minutes (on average), the proof
difficulty increases. Alternatively, if the network and its participants mine blocks at a slower rate
(perhaps because the number of miners falls), the proof of work difficulty falls, ensuring that the
number of active miners is capable of meeting the 10-minute goal.34 The effort required of the
proof of work favors miners with greater computational power requiring significant amounts of
energy.35
Other notable and interrelated Bitcoin features include transactions fees, a hard cap on the
number of Bitcoin, and block reward halving. The limit on block approval rates means that
transactions are slow compared to traditional payment systems.36 Network participants can pay
transaction fees to incentivize miners to process their transactions more quickly. Although the
block reward (which is hard-coded into the design) is still the primary form of compensation,
transaction fees are expected to grow as block rewards shrink.37 For approximately every 210,000
blocks, the system “halves” the block reward miners receive for validating transactions. Halving occurs roughly every four years.38 The original block reward was 50 Bitcoin. As of 2022, after
three halvings, miners are rewarded 6.25 for each block mined.39 Finally, the number of Bitcoin
created is capped at 21 million, when creation of new Bitcoin is to cease.40
Ethereum
Ether is the cryptocurrency native to the Ethereum blockchain, which claims to “build on Bitcoin,
with some big differences.”41 In an assessment of Bitcoin, Vitalik Buterin—Ethereum’s
founder—described Bitcoin as having a “weak version of a concept of ‘smart’ contracts.”42 Smart
contracts are programs or software that can self-execute when various participants meet some
predetermined set of criteria. Ethereum thus set out to create an “alternative protocol for building
decentralized applications … allowing anyone to write smart contracts and decentralized
applications where they can create their own arbitrary rules for ownership, transaction formats
and state transition functions.”43 In cryptocurrency and decentralized finance (see “Decentralized
Finance (DeFi)” below), smart contracts are often used to facilitate trades between users without
an intermediary. Ethereum shares some similarities with Bitcoin, including pseudonymity,
immutability, decentralization, and broadly speaking its basic functions as a unit of account and
medium of exchange, among others. However, there are some important differences.
Because of the enhanced programmability offered, the Ethereum network has become a favorite
foundation for cryptocurrency projects that require a certain level of flexibility afforded by smart
contracts, including the creation of additional tokens and the implementation of broader
decentralized finance, or DeFi, projects.44
Bitcoin has only ever been mineable—developed from nothing and with no initial allotment or
pre-sale of coins to participants—and has a hard cap of 21 million Bitcoin. This is not the case
with Ether. Ether pre-sold a majority of the initially created cryptocurrency (83.5% at the time) in
a pre-mine in 2014 and set aside the remainder for accrued expenses and a post-sale reserve.45 As
Ether became mineable and network mining activities created more Ether, the share of pre-mined
crypto (those that were purchased prior to the network going live) fell as a percentage of the total
outstanding.
While there is no hard cap on the amount of Ether that may ever enter the system, the network
recently implemented various upgrades that sought to both limit the creation of new Ether and reduce existing supply.46 The first of the two changes implemented in the “London upgrade”
affected Ether supply. As a result of this upgrade, the network burns—or removes from
circulation—a certain amount of Ether from the supply with each transaction.47 In addition, the
recent and more momentous upgrade, called “the Merge,” drastically reduced the network block
reward.48 Therefore, new Ether supply increases at a much slower pace than before the Merge.49
The Merge was arguably one of the biggest things to happen to the Ethereum network since its
inception. The Merge shifted the network from proof of work to a proof of stake consensus
protocol.50 Ethereum, like Bitcoin, was initiated using proof of work but with the ambition from
its origins of shifting consensus protocols.51 Proof of stake is an alternative method for securing a
blockchain that proponents believe is less energy intensive.52 Proof of work requires miners to
compete with each other to solve computationally intensive, cryptographically secured puzzles,
which prioritize network nodes with computation power. In proof of stake, by contrast, any
validating node that “stakes,” or deposits, at least 32 Ether enters a pool of potential validators
that may be randomly selected to submit the next block.53 The network can seize validator-staked
Ether for malicious activity or other offenses. Ethereum’s founder claimed that the shift would
reduce the Ethereum network’s power consumption and emissions by greater than 99% and
reduce global energy consumption by 0.2%.54 Stablecoins55
Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ether fluctuate in value based on market supply and
demand. By contrast, stablecoins are digital assets “designed to maintain a stable value relative to
a national currency or other reference assets.”56 For example, the Tether stablecoin is tied to the U.S. dollar and set equal in value to $1.57 Total market capitalization for stablecoins is more than
$140 billion.58 One primary use of stablecoins is trading of other cryptocurrencies. According to
an industry data source, nearly 75% of trading on all crypto platforms is between stablecoins and
other tokens.59
Proponents often point to stablecoins’ relative stability as an advantage for their use in payments.
However, despite their name, stablecoins do not always maintain their stable value. While
stablecoins typically attempt to maintain a peg to a fiat currency, issuers may attempt to achieve
this goal in different ways. Certain stablecoins attempt to achieve this peg by holding “reserve
assets.”60 Others may use algorithms or smart contracts to manage the supply of tokens and guide
their value to various reference assets.61