 Video streaming services that use a subscription- or transaction-based system can compete by
offering content at lower prices than their competitors. Streaming services that offer live TV can
be cheaper than packages offered by MVPDs, depending on the channels the customer subscribes
to. Some MVPDs have responded by offering cheaper plans with fewer channels and by
improving their set-top boxes to offer some streaming services, such as Netflix.7 Some streaming
services that offer live TV advertise their services by promising no hidden fees, such as
equipment rentals and cancellation fees, and no annual contracts.8
Most streaming services that offer live TV do not require an annual subscription; subscribers can
sign up on a month-to-month basis instead. While the lack of a long-term commitment can be
appealing to some consumers, it also means that prices can suddenly increase.9 For example, on
June 30, 2020, YouTube TVadded eight new channels and increased its price from $50 to $65 per
month, effective immediately for new subscribers; for its current subscribers, the changes went
into effect on July 30, 2020.10
On average, the price for streaming services that offer live TV is higher than those that offer only
video-on-demand (Table 2). This may be partially due to cost differences—it tends to be costly to
license the rights to air a television network.
11 To attract more users, a streaming service that
offers live TV may try to expand the number of networks offered on its service, but this in turn
increases the cost of running the service. In contrast, a streaming service that offers video-ondemand licenses at least some movies and shows that have been previously shown elsewhere,
which tends to lower the cost of licensing this content.
Differences in prices across streaming services that offer only video-on-demand tend to be fairly
small. This may be partially due to their relatively low prices, which make it difficult to lower
prices further. Thus, in addition to competing with prices, streaming services may seek to offer
exclusive access to popular movies and TV shows to attract new subscribers.

When the first streaming services launched in the late 2000s, they offered movies and shows that
had been previously shown elsewhere. For example, when Netflix launched its streaming service
in 2007, it offered about 1,000 television shows and movies, licensed from NBC Universal, Sony
Pictures, MGM, and others; it did not offer original content. 12 A few years later, some streaming
services started commissioning movies and shows from television or film studios. This made
streaming services less dependent on licensing agreements with television networks and allowed
them to offer original programming, which increased the importance of content. 13 In 2013,
Netflix debuted its first original series, House of Cards, and became the first streaming service to
win a Television Academy Emmy Award.14 Original programs from other streaming services have
won television awards as well, such as Hulu’s Handmaid’s Tale.
15 In 2020, Netflix received 160
Emmy nominations, breaking the record for the greatest number of nominations of any network,
studio, or streaming platform.16 Nevertheless, streaming services continue to license previously broadcast movies and shows from television networks and film studios to complement their
original content.
Some streaming services, particularly those that offer live TV, advertise themselves as an
alternative to MVPDs. However, streaming services oftentimes rely on the same content creators
as television networks, such as sports leagues and television and movie studios.
17 Television
networks and movie theaters show a single program at a time, which can create incentives to
select the program with the greatest profit potential for each time slot. In contrast, streaming
services offer multiple programs for users to choose from. Thus, streaming services can feature
content that appeals to various groups of users rather than to the public at large. This may
increase competition for video content and provide new opportunities for content creators.18
Some companies that own studios and television networks offer their own video streaming
services. This can create incentives for these studios to license fewer shows and movies to other
streaming services, reserving popular content for their own streaming services instead. For
example, AT&T, which owns Warner Brothers Studio, stopped licensing certain shows—such as
Friends, The Wire, and The Sopranos—to streaming services owned by other companies, offering
these shows exclusively on its streaming services HBO and HBO Max.19 Similarly, Comcast is
offering some of its NBCUniversal shows, such as The Office and Parks and Recreation,
exclusively on its streaming service Peacock;20 Walt Disney Co. announced that The Simpsons
would be offered exclusively on its streaming service Disney+.21
Streaming services operated by companies that also own film studios and television networks
may have an advantage over their competitors. A company may provide its streaming service
exclusive access to its studio’s programming, or may choose to license the programming to its
streaming competitors for a fee. This means some streaming services are able to restrict access to
content, which could make it more difficult for new competitors to enter the video streaming
market. Entrants may need to devote significant resources to produce or license content before
offering their streaming services to customers.