Legal Authority
The FTC relied on Sections 5 and 6(g) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act) in promulgating
the Non-Compete Rule. Section 5 prohibits “unfair methods of competition” (UMC) and empowers the
FTC to enforce that prohibition through adjudication. Section 6 is titled “Additional powers of
Commission.” It confers a range of authorities, most of which involve investigations and the publication
of reports. The provision also includes Section 6(g), which empowers the FTC to “from time to time
classify corporations and . . . to make rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out” the FTC Act.
Sections 5 and 6(g) were both part of the original FTC Act, which Congress enacted in 1914. Since the
statute’s enactment, Congress has adopted several laws granting the FTC rulemaking authority over
discrete subjects, including the Wool Products Labeling Act, the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act,
the Fur Products Labeling Act, the Flammable Fabrics Act, and the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act.
The FTC first asserted that Section 6(g) endows it with general substantive rulemaking power in 1962,
and the agency adopted a number of trade regulation rules in the years that followed. Some of those rules
defined certain conduct as both a UMC and an “unfair or deceptive act or practice” (UDAP)—a separate
category of conduct prohibited by Section 5. Other rules relied only on the FTC’s UDAP power. One rule
relied solely on the FTC’s competition authority, but was never enforced and has been repealed.
In the 1970s, a trade association challenged the FTC’s authority to issue substantive rules under
Section 6(g) in National Petroleum Refiners Association v. FTC. The trade association argued that
Section 6(g) authorized only procedural rules, emphasizing that the FTC had not asserted substantive
rulemaking authority under Section 6(g) until 1962 and that FTC officials had occasionally denied the
existence of such authority. The trade association also contended that Congress’s enactment of several
statutes granting the FTC specific rulemaking authorities implied that the FTC lacked general rulemaking
authority.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit rejected those arguments. In affirming the FTC’s power to
issue legislative rules under Section 6(g), the court relied on appellate decisions construing similar
statutes as authorizing substantive rulemaking, the advantages of rulemaking in effectuating the FTC
Congressional Research Service 3
Act’s purposes, and the absence of any limiting language in the statutory text. The D.C. Circuit
downplayed the fact that the FTC had not claimed general rulemaking authority until 1962, reasoning that
the agency’s earlier interpretation of its legal authority did not warrant judicial deference. The court also
concluded that Congress may have provided the FTC with more specific rulemaking authorities based on
“uncertainty, understandable caution, and a desire to avoid litigation,” rather than a firm conviction that
the FTC lacked general rulemaking authority.
Two years after the National Petroleum Refiners decision, Congress enacted the Magnuson-Moss Act,
which imposed special procedural requirements for the FTC’s UDAP rules and eliminated the FTC’s
authority to issue such rules under Section 6(g). Magnuson-Moss did not by its terms affect the FTC’s
authority to issue UMC rules: the statute included a provision disclaiming an intent to affect “any
authority of the Commission to prescribe rules (including interpretive rules), and general statements of
policy, with respect to unfair methods of competition.”
Despite this language in Magnuson-Moss, the FTC’s putative authority to issue UMC rules has been
dormant since the enactment of that statute. The Non-Compete Rule marks the first rule promulgated
under Section 6(g) since the 1970s and the second rule ever that relies solely upon the FTC’s competition
authority.
A 1983 decision from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit agreed with the D.C. Circuit’s
reasoning in National Petroleum Refiners, but no other federal appellate court has addressed the FTC’s
authority to issue legislative rules under Section 6(g). Whether the FTC possesses such authority remains
unsettled; some commentators have argued that National Petroleum Refiners was wrongly decided and
that it is unlikely that modern courts would reach the same conclusion.
In issuing the Non-Compete Rule, the FTC defended its authority to issue substantive rules under
Section 6(g) by pointing to the provision’s plain meaning and the D.C. Circuit’s decision in National
Petroleum Refiners. The FTC also argued that Congress implicitly ratified the D.C. Circuit’s decision in
both the Magnuson-Moss Act and the Federal Trade Commission Improvements Act of 1980 (the 1980
Amendments). The 1980 Amendments imposed procedural requirements that the FTC must follow in
issuing any “rule.” It defined the term “rule” to include rules promulgated under Section 6 or
Magnuson-Moss. The statute excluded from that definition “interpretive rules, rules involving
Commission management or personnel, general statements of policy, or rules relating to Commission
organization, procedure, or practice.” The FTC argued that this exclusion confirms its authority to issue
rules under Section 6 that are not merely “interpretive rules, rules involving Commission management or
personnel, general statements of policy, or rules relating to Commission organization, procedure, or
practice.”
The FTC’s authority to issue the Non-Compete Rule depends not only on whether Section 6(g) authorizes
legislative rulemaking, but also on the scope of Section 5’s prohibition of UMC. The Supreme Court has
repeatedly said that Section 5 is broader than the Sherman Act and the Clayton Act (the other core federal
antitrust laws). However, the scope of this additional coverage—often called the FTC’s “standalone”
Section 5 authority—is unsettled.
Under previous leadership, the FTC took a narrow view of its standalone Section 5 authority. In a 2015
policy statement, the FTC indicated that decisions to bring standalone Section 5 actions would be guided
by considerations of consumer welfare, that the FTC would evaluate challenged conduct under “a
framework similar to the rule of reason,” and that the FTC was less likely to bring a standalone Section 5
action if enforcement of the Sherman Act or Clayton Act was sufficient to address the relevant
competitive harm.
The FTC rescinded this policy statement in 2021 and issued a new Section 5 policy statement the
following year. In the 2022 policy statement, the FTC identified “two key criteria” it will consider in
evaluating whether a “method of competition” is “unfair.” First, the FTC indicated that “unfair” conduct
Congressional Research Service 4
“may be coercive, exploitative, collusive, abusive, deceptive, predatory, or involve the use of economic
power of a similar nature,” and “may also be otherwise restrictive or exclusionary.” Second, the FTC
explained that such conduct “must tend to negatively affect competitive conditions”—for example, by
foreclosing or impairing the opportunities of market participants, reducing competition between rivals,
limiting choice, or otherwise harming consumers. The 2022 policy statement indicated that this second
inquiry will not turn on whether conduct directly causes harm in particular cases, but instead will focus on
whether conduct “has a tendency to generate negative consequences.”
In promulgating the Non-Compete Rule, the FTC found that non-competes violate Section 5 because they
represent “restrictive and exclusionary conduct that tends to negatively affect competitive conditions” in
labor markets and product and service markets. The FTC also determined that non-competes for workers
other than senior executives violate Section 5 because they constitute “exploitative and coercive conduct
that tends to negatively affect competitive conditions” in labor markets and product and service markets.
(A previous Legal Sidebar provides a more extensive discussion of the FTC’s justification for the
Non-Compete Rule.)
Two FTC Commissioners voted against the Non-Compete Rule, arguing that the FTC lacks the authority
to issue substantive competition regulations and that the evidence did not justify a categorical prohibition
of non-competes.