Federal Policies and American Labor Relations
The National Labor Relations Act/Wagner Act (NLRA) of 1935 was passed by Congress
to protect workers’ rights to unionization. NLRA states and defines the rights of employees to
organize and bargain collectively with their employers through representatives of their own choosing
(i.e., elected union leaders). The NLRA identified workers’ rights to form a union, join a union, and
to strike in an effort to secure better working conditions (National Labor Relations Board, 1997).
“The act also created a new National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to arbitrate deadlocked labor-
management disputes, guarantee democratic union elections and penalize unfair labor practices by
employers” (Cooper, 2004, p. 2). Furthermore, NLRA prohibited employers from setting up a
company union and firing or otherwise discriminating against workers who organized or joined
unions (Encyclopedia Britannica, 2007).
Prior to the passage of NLRA, the federal government had been largely antagonistic to
union organizing. Labor unions across the country faced significant challenges in social action
initiatives aimed at ensuring adequate wages, benefits and the reduction of industry health hazards.
During the first half of the twentieth century, for example, laborers who attempted to organize
protective associations frequently found themselves prosecuted for and convicted of conspiracy (to
do what?) (Beik, 2005). With the onset of the Great Depression, and an unemployment rate of 24.9
percent in 1933 , the national political framework shifted its focus from the protection of the
business sector to the protection of workers and individuals through the creation of New Deal
policies (e.g., Social Security and Civilian Conservation Corps). These policies hoped to create a
social safety net that would prevent further economic disaster. Due to the power of business
interests and persons advocating a free market society, many New Deal policies had been declared
unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court, including the previous labor legislation – the
National Industry Recovery Act of 1933 which authorized the President to regulate businesses in the
interests of promoting fair competition, supporting prices and competition, creating jobs for the
unemployed, and stimulating the United States economy to recover from the Great Depression
(Babson, 1999). Thus, many businesses believed that the NLRA would follow the same path. In
April of 1937, however, the NLRA was declared constitutional by the Supreme Court, highlighting
the increased power of labor unions on national politics and policymaking (Beik, 2005).
In 1935, 15 percent of American workers were unionized. By 1945, the proportion had risen
to 35 percent (Babson, 1999). During this time there were three primary types of union/employer
structural arrangements: the agency shop, the union shop, and the closed shop. Cooper (2004)
describes the arrangements as follows:
• Agency Shop: The union’s contract does not mandate that all employees join the union, but
it does mandate that the employees pay agency fees.
• Union Shop: The union’s contract requires that all employees join the union within a
specified amount of time after becoming employed.
• Closed Shop: The union’s contract mandates that the employer only hire union members
(pg. 2).
1945 marked the peak of American unionization with over one-third of American workers belonging
to labor unions. Organized labor reached the zenith of its power in the U.S. from 1935 – 1947 (Beik,
2005). Many business leaders, however, began to lobby for a loosening of union power insisting that
businesses and individuals were, due to the NLRA, prevented from exercising their right of
association and employment procedures. At the same time, the political landscape was changing and
anti-communism was used as a key argument to stymie the power of unions. Labor unions were seen
as a corrupt socialist tactic and, thus, could be associated with the red scare. The public also began to
demand action after the World War Two coal strikes and the postwar strikes in steel, autos and other
industries were perceived to have damaged the economy.
With the increasing constituent pressure and the election in 1944 of the pro-business and
pro-states’ rights Republican congress, the second significant piece of national labor legislation was
passed, the 1947 Taft-Hartley Act. Taft-Hartley effectively overturned many of the rights guaranteed
by NLRA and outlawed the closed shop arrangement (Cooper, 2004). Moreover, “section 14(b) of
Taft-Hartley made Right-to-Work laws legal and gave states the power to pass laws to outlaw both
agency and union shops” (Cooper, 2004, p. 10). This provision afforded states the opportunity to
pass laws that forbade the establishment of businesses and/or union contracts where union
membership was a condition of employment; thus, the age of RTW began.
Right-to-Work Laws
Immediately following the passage of the Taft-Hartley Act states began to enact Right-to-
Work laws. The basic concept of RTW is that workers should not be obligated to join or give
support to a union as a condition of employment (Kersey, 2007).2 The main objectives of RTW laws
have, to this day, shared similar purposes. These objectives include: a. the promotion of individual
freedom; b. the creation of a pro-business atmosphere aimed at spurring economic growth; c. the
elimination of the power of union organization. As of January 1, 2006, 22 states had passed RTW
legislation.
It is important to note that a regional divide exists with regard to the establishment of RTW laws... most of the states with RTW laws are located in the southeast, Midwest and
Rocky Mountain States. These states have traditionally maintained lower rates of unionization --
18% in 1947, 52% lower than their non-RTW counterparts (Beik, 1998).

Right-to-Work Laws and Employment
One of the key arguments offered by proponents of RTW legislation is that the laws increase
employment. Proponents believe that, if businesses are not required to operate under union wage
contracts, they will remain profitable due to decreased labor costs and the economic landscape will
encourage cross-state relocation of businesses; thus, employment opportunities will increase for all
citizens. “Opponents, however, argue that most job growth occurs from in-state business expansion
not the relocation of businesses from a non-RTW to a RTW state” (Oklahoma League of
Economists, 1996, paragraph 2). The unemployment rates in RTW states pre and post RTW passage,
as well as the comparison of RTW to non-RTW states, provide important insights in to the impact of
RTW legislation on employment across jurisdictions.
Overall, the unemployment rates in RTW states are lower than non-RTW states. For
example, the unemployment rate between 1978 and 2000 averaged 5.8percent in RTW states versus
6.3percent in non-RTW states. Additionally, between 1970 and 2000 overall employment increased
by 2.9percent annually in RTW states versus 2.0percent in non-RTW states. This trend has
continued, although tightening, into the 2000s; between 2001 and 2006 RTW states had a median
4.8percent unemployment rate compared to 5.1 percent for non-RTW states (Kersey, 2007). As of
March 2010, RTW states had an average unemployment rate of 8.6% while the rate in non-RTW
states stood at 9.4% (Bureau of Labor Statistics [BLS], 2010).
Another aspect of the impact that RTW laws have on employment relates to the type and
condition of employment between the two types of states. The share of manufacturing employment
in the U.S. in 1950 was 35percent of the workforce. This figure declined to 13 percent in 2004
(Fischer & Rupert, 2005). Many RTW advocates believe pro-business laws, such as RTW, lessen
manufacturing losses by creating a conducive business atmosphere. While both types of states have
not been able to stem the national tide, data indicates that manufacturing employment in RTW states
has decreased at a much lower rate than in their non-RTW counterparts where manufacturing
employment has seen significant decreases. Between 2001 and 2006 the typical RTW state saw
manufacturing employment decline 1.5percent annually, equaling 7.1percent overall. Non-RTW
states, however, faced even sharper declines, averaging 3.0 percent annually and 13.7 percent over the
five year period. Every non-RTW state but one, Alaska, lost manufacturing jobs during that period,
while five RTW states registered at least modest gains in this area (Wright, 2007).
In terms of job conditions, the government data shows that in 2003 the rate of workplace
fatalities per 100,000 workers was highest in right-to-work states. The rate of workplace deaths is 51
percent higher in RTW states (BLS, 2006). Nineteen of the top 25 states for worker fatality rates
were RTW states, while three of the bottom 25 states were RTW states (Bureau of Labor Statistics
[BLS], 2003). Further, in a study of New York City construction site fatalities, it was found that 93
percent of deaths happened at non-union sites (Walter, 2007). The same holds true in the coal
mining industry where 87 percent of fatalities between 2007 and 2009 occurred at non-union mines
(U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Education and Labor, 2007).
Right-to-Work and Job Growth
Holmes (1998) argues that large manufacturing establishments are more likely to be attracted
to RTW states because larger plants are more likely to be unionized. RTW laws, according to
manufacturers, help maintain competiveness and encourage development in the strained sector. He
also found that eight of the ten states with the highest manufacturing employment growth rates are
RTW states. All ten states with the lowest growth rates are non-RTW states. Opponents charge that
the laws depress individual worker wages at the expense of profits and capitalist objectives. From
1977 through 1999, Gross State Product (GSP), the market value of all goods and services produced
in a state, increased 0.5 percent faster in RTW states than in non-RTW states (Wilson, 2002).
Right-to-Work Laws and Wages
One condition of employment is the impact of RTW laws on wages. This includes both
absolute wages and the overall wage distribution across income and racial lines following RTW
passage. There are currently 132,604,980 workers in the United States (U.S.). The American worker,
as of July 2009, earned an average of $44,901 per year. This translates in to an average hourly wage
of $22.36 (Bureau of Labor Statistics [BLS], 2009).
Leading researchers disagree on the impact of RTW laws on wages. For example, 16 of the
18 states are estimated to have had higher average wages in 2000 as a result of their RTW status
(Reed, 2003). On the other hand, Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data reveals that average annual
pay is higher in non-RTW states. In addition, income polarization is higher in RTW states, with a
higher percentage of workers earning the minimum wage (even when controlling for education level)
than in non-RTW states. After years of economic development, the portion of heads of household
earning around the minimum wage is still 35.5 percent (4.4 percentage points) higher in RTW than in
high-union-density states" (Cassell, 2001).
Lawrence Mishel (2001) of the Economic Policy Institute found that in 2000 the median
wage for workers living in RTW states was $11.45, while wages for those living in non -RTW states
were $13.00, indicating that wages were 11.9 percent lower in RTW states. He further concluded that
previous research citing wage increases in RTW states were directly attributable to the improved
income characteristics of those residing in large cities located on a state border with a non-RTW
state. At the same time, when looking at weekly and hourly wages by industry between RTW and
non-RTW states adjusted for cost-of-living, RTW states have higher wages in two key industries. For
example, in manufacturing workers in RTW states earn an average of $717 weekly and $17.89 hourly
while their non-RTW counterparts earn $672 and $16.80. In education and health services, those
amounts are $717 and $21.34 for RTW and $650 and $20.06 for non-RTW. These differing statistics
question the true RTW impact on wage increases and the quality of employment.