Acquired 
 

 Autoimmune: Guillain-Barre, Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren, systemic lupus erythematosus
 Abnormal reflex responses in carotid sinus hypersensitivity, vasovagal syncope, and other neuro-meditated syncopes; and probably in postural tachycardia syndrome (PoTS)
 Abnormal sweating responses, as in generalized or focal hyperhidrosis, are related to excessive activation.
 Metabolic/ Nutritional: Diabetes mellitus, vitamin B12 deficiency
 Degenerative neurologic diseases: Parkinson disease, multiple system atrophy/Shy-Drager syndrome, pure autonomic failure presenting or suffering from orthostatic hypotension, fixed heart rate responses
 Infections: Botulism, Chagas disease, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), leprosy, Lyme disease, tetanus
 Neoplasia: Brain tumors, paraneoplastic syndromes
 Pharmacologic effects of several drugs that interfere with normal autonomic function and provoke symptoms include alpha- and beta-blocker-triggered orthostatic hypotension
 Toxin/drug-induced: Alcohol, amiodarone, chemotherapy
 Traumatic or tumoral spinal cord injuries at different levels and presenting with the so-called autonomic dysreflexia
 Uremic neuropathy/chronic liver diseases
 Medications That Exacerbate Orthostatic Hypotension
 

 Diuretics: furosemide, torsemide, thiazide
 Nitric oxide-mediated vasodilators: nitroglycerine, hydralazine, sildenafil
 Adrenergic antagonists:
 Alpha-1-adrenergic blockers: alfuzosin, terazosin
 Beta-adrenergic blockers: propranolol
 Alpha -2-adrenergic agonists: tizanidine, clonidine
 Renin-angiotensin system inhibitors: lisinopril, valsartan
 Dopamine antagonists:
 Phenothiazines: chlorpromazine
 Atypical antipsychotics: olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine
 Calcium channel blockers: verapamil, diltiazem
 Selective serotonin receptor reuptake inhibitors: paroxetine
 Antidepressants: trazodone, amitriptyline
 Go to:
 Epidemiology
 Autonomic dysfunction, taken as a whole, is not infrequent. The most common autonomic dysfunction occurs in the cardiovascular control sphere and consists of an abnormal vasovagal response that leads to syncope. Other common manifestations are related to postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) or changes seen with Parkinson disease and other parkinsonisms. Compared to other areas of autonomic control, urinary incontinence, as observed in multiple sclerosis and other nervous system disorders, is unspecific but not rare. Some symptoms of autonomic disturbance, such as the facial vasomotor and ocular symptoms in trigeminal autonomic headaches, are of secondary significance but help in diagnosis.[14][15][16][17]
 

 Orthostatic hypotension occurs in patients with neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson disease, multiple system atrophy, pure autonomic failure, and in individuals with ganglionopathies that affect autonomic nerves and peripheral neuropathy. The prevalence of orthostatic hypotension is proportional to age, and it is more common in institutionalized than community-dwelling elderly[18]. POTS is more prevalent in women. Syncope is highly prevalent in the general population, and the majority of syncope is due to reflex syncope. The frequency of reflex syncope is higher during adolescence and in individuals over 55 years. Carotid sinus hypersensitivity, defecation, and cough syncope occur almost exclusively in the elderly population.[18]
 

 Go to:
 Pathophysiology
 Pathophysiology in ANS depends upon the affected area. Both anatomically related, as well as isolated regions, can be affected. In the cardiovascular system, three pathophysiological syndromes are typically associated with chronic dysfunction of the ANS. These are Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), orthostatic hypotension with supine hypertension, and reflex cardiovascular syndromes. Hyperhidrosis and hypohidrosis are the main features of temperature control. Fixed mydriasis and myosis, also known as Adie's pupil and Horner syndrome in the eye, are also seen.
 

 Autonomic dysfunction may result from any disease that affects the peripheral or central components of ANS. Primary autonomic dysfunction involves primary (idiopathic) degeneration of autonomic postganglionic fibers without other neurologic abnormalities. Orthostatic hypotension is associated with autonomic dysfunction and motor and cerebellar abnormalities in diseases involving a central degenerative process, as described in the Shy–Drager syndrome. A central degenerative disease process involving preganglionic neuronal degeneration, presenting with orthostatic hypotension and typical parkinsonian symptoms, has been described.[19]
 

 Orthostatic hypotension is defined as a sustained reduction of systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure of 10 mmHg within three minutes of standing or head-up tilt to at least 60 degrees on the tilt table. The magnitude of fall in blood pressure depends on baseline blood pressure. In patients with supine hypertension, a reduction of 30 mmHg in systolic blood pressure may be an appropriate criterion for orthostatic hypotension. Immediately upon standing, gravitationally mediated redistribution of the blood volume and pooling of 300 to 800 ml of blood in lower limbs and splanchnic venous capacitance system occurs, which leads to a reduction of venous return and cardiac filling pressure. During standing, contraction of skeletal muscles of the lower body prevents excessive pooling and increases venous return to the heart. Orthostatic hypotension is caused by an excessive fall of cardiac output or by inadequate or defective vasoconstrictor mechanisms.
 

 Neurally mediated (reflex) syncope includes vasovagal, carotid sinus, situational (cough, swallowing, micturition) syncope. It refers to a diverse group of conditions in which there is a relatively sudden change in ANS activity leading to a drop in blood pressure, heart rate, and cerebral perfusion. Neurally mediated syncope is best understood as a reflex with afferent, central, and efferent pathways, and the use of 'neurocardiogenic syncope' should be abandoned because the origin of the reflex is rarely in the heart.
 

 Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is defined as a sustained heart rate increment of 30 beats per minute within 10 minutes of standing or head-up tilt in the absence of orthostatic hypotension. For individuals of ages 12 to 19 years, the requirement is at least 40 beats per minute. POTS may be accompanied by symptoms of autonomic overactivity and cerebral hypoperfusion that are relieved by recumbency. The pathophysiology and etiology of POTS are unknown but are likely heterogeneous. POTS is associated with recent viral illness, chronic fatigue syndrome, deconditioning, and limited or restricted autonomic neuropathy.[18]
 

 Diabetic neuropathy is a kind of nerve pathology that may occur for those with diabetes mellitus. Hyperglycemia interferes with a nerve's ability to send signals and weakens the walls of the vasa nervorum blood vessels that supply nerves with nutrients and oxygen. Diabetic neuropathy can affect the nerves of the ANS, especially general visceral afferent (GVA) fibers, resulting in gastroparesis and decreased blood pressure regulation.[20] GVA fibers affected by diabetic neuropathy reduce the response of their corresponding general visceral efferent (GVE).
 

 Parkinson disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by bradykinesia and hypokinesia combined with rest tremor and rigidity. Constipation, dysphagia, sialorrhea, rhinorrhea, urinary difficulties, and sexual dysfunction are the common nonmotor problems related to autonomic dysfunction in Parkinson disease.[21][22] These signs and symptoms are also present in multiple system atrophy (MSA), making it hard to distinguish between the two disorders. However, the autonomic symptoms in MSA are generally more severe than in Parkinson disease. As the disease progresses, MSA tends to be less responsive to levodopa and is often associated with pyramidal and cerebellar findings.