Federal Clemency for Marijuana Possession
On October 6, 2022, President Biden issued a proclamation granting “a full, complete, and unconditional
pardon” to “all current United States citizens and lawful permanent residents” who had committed or
been convicted of simple possession of marijuana under the CSA or a related provision of the D.C. Code.
President Biden’s invocation of the clemency power means that persons who committed simple
possession of marijuana before the date of the proclamation may not be prosecuted or punished for the
offense under the relevant provisions of the CSA or the D.C. Code. (Although the District of Columbia has its own criminal code, its criminal justice system has some overlap with the federal system and is
subject to the President’s clemency power.)
Several factors limit the scope of the pardon. First, it applies only to violations of federal and D.C. law
and does not affect other state law marijuana offenses. In announcing the pardon, President Biden also
encouraged state governors to take similar steps but, under the United States’ federalist system of
government, the President has no direct power to change state law or compel the states to adopt federal
policies. While some governors have taken similar steps or expressed willingness to do so, in some states,
governors cannot independently grant clemency.
Second, the pardon applies only to simple possession of marijuana, not to other marijuana-related CSA
offenses such as manufacture, distribution, or possession with intent to distribute or to other federal
crimes. Federal prosecutions of simple possession of marijuana are relatively uncommon. The U.S.
Sentencing Commission (USSC) reports that about 7,700 people subject to the pardon were convicted of
only simple possession since FY1992, none of whom are currently in federal custody. (Additional
individuals not subject to the pardon were convicted during that period.) In FY2021, 117 people subject to
the pardon were convicted of only simple possession. A smaller number of people were convicted of
possessing marijuana and possessing other illicit drugs or committing other crimes. Those people would
remain liable for the other offenses. Shortly after the pardon was announced, the USSC issued policy
priorities including “consideration of possible amendments to the [Sentencing] Guidelines Manual
relating to criminal history to address … the impact of simple possession of marihuana offenses.”
Third, the pardon by its terms “does not apply to individuals who were non-citizens not lawfully present
in the United States at the time of their offense.” According to a 2016 USSC report, the vast majority of
federal marijuana possession arrests occur at the border between the United States and Mexico. Among
offenders sentenced for marijuana possession in FY2013, the USSC reports that over 94% of those
arrested at the border were not U.S. citizens. To the extent those individuals were not lawfully present in
the country, they would not benefit from the pardon.
Fourth, the pardon applies only to offenses committed before the proclamation. The Supreme Court has
explained that the President may issue a pardon “at any time after [an offense’s] commission, either
before legal proceedings are taken, or during their pendency, or after conviction and judgment.” While
DOJ is currently not prioritizing prosecuting low-level marijuana offenses, the October 2022 pardon does
not prevent prosecution of future offenses if the current Administration or a future Administration adopts
a different policy.
Fifth, the pardon may not remove all legal consequences of marijuana possession, because it does not
expunge convictions. Moreover, some collateral consequences of marijuana-related activities do not
depend on a person being charged with or convicted of a CSA violation.
Finally, and most fundamentally, the pardon does not change the status of marijuana under federal law.
The President lacks the power to make such a change unilaterally. In announcing the grant of clemency,
President Biden directed the Attorney General to review the classification of marijuana under the CSA,
which is one way the federal government could change the status of the substance consistently with
relevant separation-of-powers principles and the CSA’s procedural requirements. Any agency action in
response to that directive would likely occur through notice-and-comment rulemaking, subject to judicial
review and applicable international treaty obligations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations, some commentators have described the October 2022 pardon
as a significant development in national marijuana policy that may restore some civic rights to those who
benefit from it. Some have expressed concerns that the pardon might benefit offenders who committed
more serious offenses but pleaded guilty to simple possession or that relaxing controls on marijuana may
generally lead to an increase in crime. Others advocate for further pardons, expungements, and legal
reforms to decriminalize marijuana.