Intermittent fasting is an eating pattern that may benefit heart health, reduce inflammation, improve cell repair processes, and help burn fat
 Intermittent fasting is an eating pattern in which you cycle between periods of eating and periods of fasting.
 There are many types of intermittent fasting, such as the 16:8 and 5:2 methods.
 Numerous studies suggest that it can have powerful benefits for your body and brain.
 Here are 10 evidence-based health benefits of intermittent fasting.
 1. Changes in the function of hormones, cells, and genes
 When you don’t eat for a while, several things happen in your body.
 For example, your body changes hormone levels to make stored body fat more accessible and starts important cellular repair processes.
 Here are some of the changesTrusted Source that may happen in your body as a result of intermittent fasting:
 • Insulin level: Your blood level of insulin drops significantly, which promotes fat burning.
 • Human growth hormone (HGH) level: Your blood level of HGH may increase dramatically. Higher levels of this hormone promote fat burning and muscle gain and have numerous other benefits.
 • Cellular repair: Your body starts important cellular repair processes such as removing waste material from cells.
 • Gene expression: Beneficial changes occur in several genes and molecules related to longevity and protection against disease.
 Many of the benefits of intermittent fasting are related to these changes in hormones, cellular function, and gene expression.
 

 HEALTHLINE NEWSLETTER
 Get our free diabetes-friendly recipes
 We rounded up a few nutritious and delicious recipes for you to try next time you need inspiration in the kitchen. Join our diabetes newsletter for your free recipes and expert guidance twice a week.
 you lose weight and visceral fat
 Many people try intermittent fasting in an effort to lose weight.
 Generally, intermittent fasting will make you eat fewer meals. Unless you compensate by eating much more during the other meals, you’ll end up taking in fewer calories.
 Additionally, intermittent fasting enhances hormone function to promote weight loss. Lower insulinTrusted Source levels, higher HGH levels, and increasedTrusted Source levels of norepinephrine all increase the breakdown of body fat and make it easier for your body to use fat for energy.
 For this reason, short-term fasting actually improves your metabolismTrusted Source, helping you burn even more calories.
 In a 2022 studyTrusted Source involving 131 people with obesity, researchers found that those who participated in 12 weeks of intermittent fasting lost an average of 9% of their body weight — more than those who engaged in other weight loss methods.
 But this study focused on the 5:2 intermittent fasting plan, which means the participants ate normally for 5 days and restricted their calories for 2 days each week.
 The authors of a 2020 reviewTrusted Source of 27 studies noted that participants doing intermittent fasting lost 0.8–13% of their baseline body weight.
 In a 2020 trialTrusted Source, researchers focused on people who followed the 16:8 method, which involves fasting for 16 hours per day and eating within an 8-hour window.
 The people who fasted didn’t lose significantly more weight than those who ate three meals per day. But after testing a subset of the participants in person, the researchers found that those who fasted had lost a significant amount of lean mass, including lean muscle.
 More studies are needed to investigate the effect of fasting on muscle loss. But, all things considered, intermittent fasting has the potential to be an incredibly powerful weight loss tool.