Title: Fugitive Tracking using Open Source Intelligence ( OSINT)
Author: Pranav Waghmare
Abstract:
The fugitive tracking has been a challenging topic for various law enforcement agencies across
the world. The use of technology, social media, and other social media platforms, etc offers
unique opportunities to track the digital footprint left by Fugutives. In this research paper, we
will explore the methodologies, Legal as well as Ethical Considerations, OSINT mapping, and
cyber forensic technologies that can be helpful in tracking fugitives.
Introduction :
Fugitive tracking has evolved over a period of time but also now has a global framework.
Interpol created a global framework and classification of fugitives based on their crime and
threat level. They have also created a color-coded system. The local government agencies also
have their own classification system for fugitives.
Methodologies :
OSINT Framework Mapping :
The Interpole’s framework for data classification can be incorporated with OSINT. The Interpole
classifies fugitives with color codes and also updates the data every hour. This is really for
mapping it to OSINT Framework for real-time monitoring and cross-referencing the searches.
OSINT comparatively accesses vast resources but the Interpol framework provides the necessary
filter to refine the searches.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4719968
Here is the overview of the Color code System used by Interpol :
● Red Notice: Red is the highest level of importance and also states the individual wanted
by Law enforcement and governments for arrest and extradition
For Example: The person who is found guilty of murder and on the run falls under Red
Notice
● Blue Notice: The Blue Notice is mainly concerned with gathering enough information
about the person of Interest by Law Enforcement.
For Example, The people under blue notices are suspects and wanted for questioning by
authorities. The gang members whom law enforcement may suspect connected with
crime and needed for questioning will fall under Blue Notice
● Green Notice: The green notice fugitive is considered a public safety threat.
For Example, Sex Offenders and Drug traffickers will fall under “ Green Notice”. Here
the country is making Interpol aware this person is a threat to public safety
● Yellow Notice: Yellow Notice is more about the Identity of the missing individuals or
person who is incapable of identifying themselves
For Example, a Missing Child who is underage or an individual with mental incapability
will be under a Yellow Notice
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4719968
● Black Notice: The black notice is issued about unidentified bodies.
For Example, If a war crime is committed and mass graves of unidentified bodies are
found they come under black notice
● Purple Notice: The purple notice is mainly used to gather information about the
operational details of the crime such as devices used or methods used by them to hide.
For Example, Drug Tunnels will come under purple notice
Cyber Forensics and OSINT :
The Digital Footprint creation will be very efficient with the use of OSINT. The geolocation tags,
social media posts, and publicly available information about fugitives will help to create a digital
footprint and help investigators understand the patterns in fugitive behavior. This also helps to
reconstruct the timeline as shown in Figure 1 which can help the investigator understand the
events and suspects.
Geolocation Tracking: With OSINT we can build geotags of the places an individual has been
and cross-check with Interpol notices as they get updated every hour. OSINT also provides
information about individuals known associated that can be also valuable in terms of building
Geolocation Tracking. For example, One can search the fugitive's location and past history of
residential addresses can help to pinpoint their possible location and understand the pattern in
their movements
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4719968
Social Media Monitoring: The social media accounts of fugitives provide essential details about
their likes or dislikes, the images and videos posted by them, and the metadata associated with
them. Social media also give understanding to their known friends or associates. This can be
further matched with witness and journalist statements. The metadata search and social media
monitoring can help create a digital footprint and also be searched for further updated
information posted by Interpol every hour.
Legal and Ethical Consideration :
While implementing as well as using OSINT framework it is really essential to keep track of
local laws and jurisdiction. There is the possibility that this system can be abused if it falls into
the wrong hands, It can be used to track dissidents, political and religious minorities, or
opponents. Hence there need to be awareness of local laws as well ethical consideration must be
taken into consideration. There have been instances where the Interpol framework was abused in
the past but over the period of time, Interpol is evolving. For Example, China issued red notices
for Uyghurs. The Interpol latter made firm in their policy that they will not issue notices for
individuals who have refugee status in another country and they firmly believe that an individual
is innocent until proven guilty. Hence, The Interpol framework mapping into OSINT is essential
as Interpol holds the highest standards of Ethical approach in terms of tracking Fugutatives.
Conclusion :
To Conclude, The OSINT is a highly efficient framework, and mapping into the Interpoles
framework makes it a very effective tool with legal and ethical considerations
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4719968
References:
1. Interpol (2011) Interpole’s Rules on Processing Data: Interpol
https://www.interpol.int/en/Who-we-are/Legal-framework/Data-protection
2 C. Rafailă, F. Gurzău, C. Grumăzescu, and I. Bica, "MTAFinder - Unified OSINT platform for
efficient data gathering," 2023 15th International Conference on Electronics, Computers and
Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), Bucharest, Romania, 2023
3 HOROS, ANDREW J.(2023) 21st Century Open-Source Intelligence and Law
Enforcement Utilization
4 Lakomy, Miron. (2023). Open-source intelligence and research on online terrorist
communication: Identifying ethical and security dilemmas.
5 Daragh Murray, Yvonne McDermott, K Alexa Koenig, Mapping the Use of Open Source
Research in UN Human Rights Investigations, Journal of Human Rights Practice, Volume
14, Issue 2, July 2022, Pages 554–581 ( Figure 1)
6 J. W. Johnsen and K. Franke, "The impact of preprocessing in natural language for open
source intelligence and criminal investigation," 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2019
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4719968