U.S. electric vehicle sales doubled between 2020 and 2021 and account for about 4% of all
vehicles sold. Infrastructure to charge those vehicles exists along a range, from 120 volt plugs in
many home garages to more expensive faster chargers with more than 400 volts. Market surveys have shown that consumers
are concerned about the lack of an extensive charging network across the country, as well as the related concerns that some
electric vehicles have a limited range before needing to be recharged. The IIJA grant programs were designed to address
those concerns along major U.S. highways. In addition, the IIJA directs FHWA to develop standards for charging
infrastructure funded by certain federally programs so charging is secure, provides a range of payment options, and meets
certain installation requirements.
The federal government has in the past provided limited financial support for installation of electric vehicle charging stations,
such as through the alternative fuel infrastructure tax credit—modified by the law commonly referred to as the Inflation
Reduction Act of 2022 (IRA, P.L. 117-169)—and the Congestion Mitigation Air Quality Improvement program. With just
over 50,000 charging stations in October 2022—and more than 130,000 ports for charging—electric vehicle charging
capacity is far below one estimate that 2.4 million charging stations that may be necessary in 2030 to sustain an electric
vehicle fleet of 26 million vehicles (an estimate from one group of what may be needed to support California and other
states’ zero-emission vehicle (ZEV) goals).
The two $7.5 billion grant programs established by IIJA are
• The National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure (NEVI) Formula Program, which is to provide $5 billion in
grants, with $1 billion distributed by FHWA in each of FY2022-FY2026. All states, the District of
Columbia, and Puerto Rico are eligible, and funds must be used for charging along the national highway
system and primarily along highways already designated as alternative fuel corridors. Under existing
FHWA guidelines, new charging stations should be spaced a maximum of 50 miles apart. A new FHWA
rule sets additional standards and requirements. In September 2022, all state plans were approved, opening
access to FY2022 and FY2023 NEVI funding.
• The Charging and Fueling Infrastructure (CFI) grant program, which is to provide $2.5 billion over five
years to strategically deploy alternative fuel infrastructure for vehicles powered by electricity and other
fuels. Half of the new funding is to be used along FHWA corridors earmarked for those fuels. The other
half is to be applied to uses in public building parking lots and in similar publicly accessible locations. CFI
grants differ from NEVI in two ways: (a) grants are to be subject to a competitive process, unlike the
formula-based NEVI; and (b) priority are to be given to applicants in rural areas, disadvantaged
communities, and areas with high rates of multi-unit housing. 

Using only the information provided in the above context block, answer the following question: 

Of the money the National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Formula Program provides, $1 billion is distributed by which agency? 