Stretching: 9 Benefits
Is stretching good for you?
There are many benefits to regular stretching. Not only can stretching help
increase your flexibility, which is an important factor of fitness, but it can
also improve your posture, reduce stress and body aches, and more.
9 Benefits of stretching
1. Increases your flexibility
Regular stretching can help increase your flexibility, which is crucial for
your overall health. Not only can improved flexibility help you to perform
everyday activities with relative ease, but it can also help delay the reduced
mobility that can come with aging.
2. Increases your range of motion
Being able to move a joint through its full range of motion gives you more
freedom of movement. Stretching on a regular basis can help increase your
range of motion.
3. Improves your performance in physical activities
Performing dynamic stretches (moving stretches) prior to physical activities
has been shown to help. It may also help improve your performance in an
athletic event or exercise.
4. Increases blood flow to your muscles
Performing stretches on a regular basis may improve your circulation.
Improved circulation increases blood flow to your muscles, which can
shorten your recovery time and reduce muscle soreness (also known as
delayed onset muscle soreness or DOMS).
5. Improves your posture
Muscle imbalances are common and can lead to poor posture.
One source found that a combination of strengthening and stretching
specific muscle groups can reduce musculoskeletal pain and encourage
proper alignment. That, in turn, may help improve your posture.
6. Helps to heal and prevent back pain
Tight muscles can lead to a decrease in your range of motion. When this
happens, you increase the likelihood of straining the muscles in your back.
Stretching can help heal an existing back injury by stretching the muscles.
A regular stretching routine can also help prevent future back pain by
strengthening your back muscles and reducing your risk for muscle strain.
7. Is great for stress relief
When you’re experiencing stress, there’s a good chance your muscles are
tense. That’s because your muscles tend to tighten up in response to
physical and emotional stress. Focus on areas of your body where you
tend to hold your stress, such as your neck, shoulders, and upper back.
8. Can calm your mind
Participating in a regular stretching program not only helps increase your
flexibility, but it can also calm your mind. While you stretch, focus
on mindfulness and meditation exercises, which give your mind a mental
break.
9. Helps decrease tension headaches
Tension and stress headaches can interfere with your daily life. In addition
to a proper diet, adequate hydration, and plenty of rest, stretching may help
reduce the tension you feel from headaches.