Yelp’s Self-preferencing Claims
AMERICANACTIONFORUM.ORG
Yelp brought its lawsuit against Google largely alleging a violation of Section 2 of the Sherman Act, which
prohibits the illegal monopolization of a market. To succeed on a Section 2 illegal monopolization claim, a
plaintiff must show two elements: 1) that the defendant had monopoly power in a relevant market, and 2) that
the firm illegally acquired or maintained that monopoly power using anticompetitive means. While Yelp alleges
a few different theories in the case, this paper focuses on the claim that Google is using monopoly power in the
general search market to self-preference local search offerings at the expense of rivals such as Yelp.
Element 1: Monopoly Power
First, Yelp must show that Google has monopoly power in a relevant market. For the type of conduct at issue in
this case, Yelp would likely need to show that Google both has monopoly power in the general search market
and uses that monopoly power to attempt to monopolize the more specific local search market.
The timing of this lawsuit is not a coincidence. In July, the DOJ won its case arguing that Google had illegally
monopolized the general search market through the use of default search engine agreements with browsers and
smartphone manufacturers. While that specific conduct isn’t at issue here, Yelp will almost certainly point to the
finding that Google does, in fact, have monopoly power in general search. This provides Yelp with a strong
foundation for its case, and if a court accepts Yelp’s argument, Yelp would simply need to show either that
Google has monopoly power in the local search market or that Google has sufficient market power to pose a
dangerous probability of monopolizing that market.
Yelp’s case isn’t clear cut, however. First, the decision in the DOJ case is not binding here because Yelp is
suing in a different jurisdiction, though a district court opinion from another jurisdiction may be a persuasive
authority. Even if the judge in the Yelp case defers to the D.C. decision, the D.C. decision largely dismissed
arguments about generative AI being a viable alternative to the traditional search engine because, at the time of
discovery, the technology didn’t exist commercially. Within the past two years, tools that offer similar search
functionality such as ChatGPT have grown significantly, providing an alternative to Google’s general search
product and restricting Google’s ability to act as a monopolist. Second, Google will undoubtedly argue that
local search is not distinct from general search.
Element 2: Anticompetitive Conduct
In addition to monopoly power, Yelp will need to show that Google could acquire that monopoly power in the
local search market through “willful acquisition…as distinguished from growth or development as a
consequence of a superior product, business acumen, or historic accident.”
At the core of the complaint, Yelp alleges that
“Google has degraded quality, demoted rivals, and grown its monopoly power by (1) inserting
Google’s own vertical search results at the top of its horizontal search results page to divert user
attention away from organic search results and (2) excluding rivals and their vertical content from
that prime placement in the vertical search sections that populate the top of the [search engine
results page].”
This argument relies on what is known as “self-preferencing,” a legal theory that has become popular in
European competition law in recent years, but is largely dismissed by U.S. courts. Courts in the United States
have found that even firms with monopoly power generally have no duty to deal with their rivals, as firms
AMERICANACTIONFORUM.ORG
should be able to choose how they offer their products and services to better compete on the merits. Some tying
arrangements can violate the law, but tying arguments generally require a firm to tie the purchase of a product in
a market in which the firm has monopoly power to the purchase of a product in another market in which the
firm does not have monopoly power. Yet as antitrust scholar Herbert Hovenkamp has explained, these types of
tying agreements do not usually reach mere preferential ordering of goods that falls short of prohibitions on
dealing.
The reason courts generally don’t recognize self-preferencing as a viable theory of harm under the law is
because firms use these displays to compete on the merits. If a customer searches for “best local lunch spots
near me,” for example, Yelp would still be the top general search result on the website, though Google Places
appears at the top of the result with a direct list of restaurants, their reviews, and their locations. Google, by
incorporating its own vertical products, provides the user with immediate suggestions to the question, a tool to
see how individuals rate the restaurants, and a map to see how far away they are. And if users want a more
detailed local search option, they can simply click on the Yelp link right below the vertical offerings.
Courts tend to prefer to give firms freedom to design their products as they see fit, largely due to concerns that
mandating specific designs could negatively affect competition and consumers.
AICOA in an Alternate Universe
The American Innovation and Choice Online Act specifically targets the kind of conduct at issue here. First, the
bill would designate large technology platforms like Google as covered platforms. Second, the bill would make
it illegal to “preference the products, services, or lines of business of the covered platform operator over those of
another business user on the covered platform in a manner that would materially harm competition,” along with
a variety of other restrictions on harming smaller competitors.
Under AICOA, a case against Google would more likely succeed, though it would still present challenges.
First, and most important, Yelp couldn’t bring the case directly under the law, as AICOA would require the
Department of Justice, the Federal Trade Commission, or a state attorney general to bring a claim. Yelp could
still bring private litigation, and perhaps having this law on the books may persuade courts to recognize a self-
preferencing claim, but it would not be able to bring an AICOA claim.
Second, under AICOA, a plaintiff could largely ignore any discussion of monopoly power. Monopoly power is
difficult to demonstrate, and it is extremely costly to adjudicate at trial for all parties involved. It is, however, a
critical part to the competition analysis: If a firm lacks the power to profitably raise prices or exclude rivals, it is
unlikely that the firm’s behavior would harm competition regardless of how it acts, as alternatives exist and
business would go elsewhere. Instead, under AICOA, Google would essentially already be found to have that
power, forgoing any analysis of market structure and restrictions on behavior, and would hold instead that the
firm is large enough for the courts to be concerned.
AMERICANACTIONFORUM.ORG
Third, AICOA specifically prohibits self-preferencing, a theory largely not recognized by courts in the United
States as described above. Though the legislation includes language about materially harming competition,
courts would have flexibility in interpreting that provision. It could simply be a rule of reason analysis in which
the court weighs the procompetitive justifications against the anticompetitive harms, but it could also mean that
there is some harm to the competitive process, regardless of whether there are procompetitive justifications or
even on the net a benefit to competition.
Similarly, the legislation would allow defendants to argue an affirmative defense that the conduct was
“reasonably tailored and reasonably necessary…to maintain or substantially enhance the core functionality of
the covered platform,” but affirmative defenses mean that the defendant has already been found in violation of
the law and have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the defense applies. In other
words, it would be up to the defendant to prove that that the conduct was reasonably tailored and reasonably
necessary. This is similar to the burden-shifting analysis under the current anticompetitive conduct element of
Section 2 claims – but by requiring the defendant prove that the conduct would “substantially” enhance the core
functionality of a product, a firm like Google would have a more difficult time arguing the procompetitive case
for conduct that led to vertical integration.