4 NUTRITION 


Nutrition is extremely important for individuals who are doing a sport in competitive level and for recreational individuals as well. Proper nutrition makes exercising more efficient and improves recovery from the exercises. A versatile diet that considers limitations ensures that the most important areas e.g. vitamins, mineralsand macro- nutrients are covered. The recommended total energy intake varies between individuals, sports and training period. The emphasis of macronutrients varies between sports. Endurance sports require more energy from carbohydrates than sports related to speed and power. (Mero 2016, 177.) The specific training period, as mentioned before affects energy requirement level. During the general preparation periods, energy intake varies from 3000 kcal to 6000 kcal depending on the exercise duration and intensity. One rule of thumb is to calculate daily need with 45-70 kcal/kg of body weight. Total energy intake should vary depending on the need, however, the amount of carbohydrates should remain high to be able to maintain proper recovery. Total energy intake should be 100-300 kcal over the daily consumption to recover and improve optimally. (Mero 2016, 204 –205.) 


4.1 Carbohydrates Carbohydrates form the base of nutrition for endurance athletes. Carbohydrates are needed as an energy source during long lasting exercises and in recovery. The amount of carbohydrates consumed should be 6-10 g/kg or 60-75% of total energy intake. Carbohydrates that are consumed before training ensure that the blood glucose level stays high and the intensity can be as high as planned. This can be achieved by consuming a meal that includes carbohydrates and protein 1- 4 hours before the exercise. (Mero 2016, 204 – 205.) Good sources of carbohydrates include e.g. rice, pasta, potatoes, bread and fruits. It is recommended that recreational runners should prefer fiber rich carbohydrate sources because they fit for wellbeing purposes also. However, for athletes with high-energy expenditure, sugars can be used to reach high enough carbohydrate intake level. Sugar rich energy sources are e.g. juices, jams and honey. (Ilander, 2014a, 136—137.) 


4.2 Fat Fats are needed to maintain hormonal functions in the body, and to enhance the absorption of vitamins. Fat intake level should be 1,0-1,5 g/kg or 20-30% of total energy intake (Mero 2016, 204). Due to high amount of energy that fats contain, the amount should be limited. The high requirement of carbohydrates and protein also affect to the intake level of fat. Fats that are consumed should mainly be unsaturated fat. Athletes should favor products that include low levels of fat. (Arjanne, Laaksonen & Ojala 2016, 164 – 168.) Good sources of fat include high amount of un-saturated fats and are low on saturated fats. Un-saturated fats can be found from e.g. nuts, fish and vegetable oils. Saturated fat can be found from e.g. red meat, and thus too extensive use should be avoided. (Ilander, 2014b, 229—238.) 


4.3 Protein Proteins are used to build muscle mass, and serve as an energy source during long lasting performances. Protein intake level should be 2-3 g/kg or 15-20% of total energy intake (Mero 2016, 204). A high amount of proteins in the diet ensures, that there is no loss in muscle mass, and that the recovery from the training is optimal. Proteins also help in weight control by giving a feeling of satiety. (Arjanne, Laaksonen & Ojala, 2016, 164 – 168.) In versatile diet, the amount of protein is covered, but in case additional protein is needed, it can be consumed from supplements or from other sources. For people with special diets e.g. vegetarians and vegans, it is extremely important to make sure that the protein intake level is sufficient. Good sources of protein are e.g. milk, eggs, fish, seeds and nuts. (Ilander & Lindblad, 2014, 222—225.) 


4.4 Carbohydrate and hydration loading for competitions Carbohydrate loading is beneficial before long lasting events, because the body’s glycogen stores can become a limiting factor for performance. Filling up the glycogen stores will allow one to perform longer with high intensity. There are several strategies for carbohydrate loading, some being riskier than others. In the guide, we introduced a fast and low risk way to do it. A fast and low risk method for carbohydrate loading starts with a short, but maximal intensity exercise, which is done 48 hours before the competition. After the exercise, a very high carbohydrate intake is maintained for 24 hours. The amount of carbohydrates consumed correspond to 12 g/kg of fat free body mass. During this 24 hours, no training should be done to avoid depletion of the glycogen stores. After the 24 hour period, a normal, high carbohydrate diet (6-10 g/kg) is maintained until the competition. (Fairchild et al 2002.) Good carbohydrate sources for loading purposes are pasta, white bread, rice and sports drinks. During the carbohydrate loading, protein and fat rich food should be avoided as well as low energy foods e.g. vegetables (Collier & O’dea 1983; Fairchild et al 2002). Dehydration is a risk factor that can ruin a well-planned competition. It can be avoided by consuming additional two liters of liquid for every day for 3-4 days before the competition and by consuming liquids during the competition as well. The competition day should have normal liquid consumption. A sufficient amount of liquids during the competition is 0,5-1 liter per hour. (Juoksijalehti n.d.) However, consuming too much liquid can predispose one to hyponatremia (Mayoclinic 2014).