Mpox is a rare zoonotic disease caused by infection with monkeypox virus (MPXV) which belongs to the Orthopoxvirus genus in the family Poxviridae1. The specific animal reservoir of MPXV remains unknown. MPXV is found naturally in certain Central and West African countries. There are two main clades (variants) of mpox: Clade one (I) (formerly Congo Basin clade) and Clade two (II) (formerly West African clade). Clade II consists of two subclades (IIa and IIb). In addition to systemic symptoms, mpox is characterised by painful skin rash or mucosal lesions. Person to person transmission occurs through close contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets and contaminated materials such as bedding. Most cases of mpox infection are mild. Infections due to clade I are associated with more severe disease and a higher case fatality ratio. Until April 2022, export of mpox beyond endemic regions in Africa was rare, and limited to cases that had travelled to endemic areas, or to zoonotic transmission from imported animals.1 On 16 May 2022, the UK Health Security Agency reported four mpox cases among men with no links to an endemic area, and who self-identified as gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (gbMSM).2 On 18 May 2022, Portugal reported five confirmed and 20 suspect mpox cases among gbMSM.3 Global case numbers increased quickly. By 25 May 2022, 219 confirmed cases had been reported worldwide.4 On 23 July 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO), declared the global mpox outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).5 Since 1 January 2022 and as of 8 May 2023, 87,377 confirmed cases including 140 deaths, have been reported from 111 countries.6 Isolates from outbreak cases belonged to MPXV Clade II (previously known as the West African clade) - specifically subclade IIb. 7 On 10 May 2023, WHO determined mpox no longer constituted a PHEIC.8 We describe the epidemiology of mpox cases and the response to the mpox outbreak between May 2022 and May 2023.
Mpox was made a notifiable disease in Ireland on 27 May 2022.9 Cases were reported to Ireland’s Computerised Infectious Disease Reporting (CIDR) system.10 In addition to the standard notification, Public Health Areas (PHAs) collected additional data about cases, including demographic factors, clinical details, potential exposures and vaccination history. Laboratory testing for MPXV was undertaken at the National Virus Reference Laboratory11and the Molecular Virology Laboratory at St James’s Hospital. PHAs also undertook contact tracing and risk assessment for close contacts. A national database was developed which allowed information on mpox close contacts to be recorded, including the setting in which exposure may have occurred (i.e. household, sexual, occupational), and vaccination status (e.g. previously vaccinated, or provided with postexposure prophylaxis). 12, 13 Data are presented on all confirmed mpox cases notified on CIDR up to midnight 27 May 2023 and extracted on 30 May 2023.
Epidemiology of mpox cases Between 27 May 2022 and 27 May 2023, 229 confirmed cases of mpox were notified. The first case was notified on 31 May 2022 (week 22 2022) (Figure 1). The earliest known date of onset of symptoms among confirmed cases was 13 May 2022 (week 19 2022). Cases peaked in week 34 2022 (21-27 August 2022). In the first 23 weeks of 2023, only two confirmed cases were notified, one each in January and April. Gender was male in 226 cases and female in three cases. Median age was 35 years (range 16-68 years), with 46% of cases aged between 18-34 years and 79.8% aged between 18-44 years. The majority of cases were either born in Ireland (46.8%) or Latin America (32.3%). Summary characteristics of confirmed mpox cases are presented in Table 1. Contact tracing Interim public health guidance for the management of mpox outbreak cases and their contacts was released on 3 June 2022, adapted from earlier guidance for sporadic mpox cases.14 The purpose of contact tracing initially was to limit transmission, to identify vulnerable contacts at risk for more severe disease (pregnant women, young children and immunocompromised), and to raise awareness among contacts so that they would seek medical help early if they became symptomatic. Later, when vaccine was available, eligible contact were offered post exposure prophylaxis (PEP) vaccination.
Initially, mpox was viewed as a High Consequence Infectious Disease (HCID) with high-risk contacts recommended to quarantine for 21 days.15 As understanding of the clinical severity and transmission risks increased, this approach was modified. Following ongoing dynamic risk assessments; quarantine of contacts was no longer required; there was a progressive easing of the definition of a high-risk contact; and cases (and their clinical samples and waste) linked to the global outbreak i.e. caused by MPXV subclade IIb, were no longer managed as HCID. Establishment of an Incident Management Team A national incident management team (IMT) first met on 16 May 2022, the same day as the UK first issued their alert. Given the close links between gbMSM communities across Europe, and in particular between Ireland and the UK, the likelihood of cases arising in Ireland was considered high. The IMT was responsible for monitoring of national and global situation, ongoing risk assessment, and advising on and coordinating the response measures. The IMT initially met daily when the event first emerged, and then weekly. Recognising the breadth of the response required, involving input across many different parts of the health service, and in particular the magnitude of implementing a national vaccination programme, the IMT transitioned into a National Crisis Management Team (NCMT) led by the Acute Operations division of the HSE in September 2022. The IMT and subsequent NCMT included representation from a wide range of disciplines and sectors across the health service including: public health; virology; clinical services including sexual health, infectious diseases, paediatrics, obstetrics, occupational health and general practice; infection prevention and control; the National Immunisation Office (NIO); the HSE Sexual Health and Crisis Pregnancy Programme (SHCPP); the National Ambulance Service; HSE Communications; acute hospital and community operations. From the onset, the IMT included representation from the gbMSM community with members from the Gay Health Network (GHN), an alliance of organisations with mandates to promote the sexual health of gbMSM in Ireland, and the MPOWER programme at HIV Ireland, a peer-driven communitylevel programme focusing on the sexual health and wellbeing among gbMSM16, 17. On transitioning to the NCMT format, MPOWER continued to be represented on the group. Guidance and service development IMT members initially, and subsequently the Pathways of Care Programme of the NCMT, worked with the Health Protection Research and Guideline Development Unit in developing and maintaining a suite of guidance on clinical and public health management of probable and confirmed cases and their close contacts, including assessment and testing, contact tracing, infection prevention and control, transportation, and waste management.18 Guidance was reviewed and updated at regular intervals as the outbreak evolved and understanding increased.
Community engagement Supported by the Sexual Health Crisis Pregnancy Programme (SHCPP) and HSE Communications, GHN and MPOWER continued to develop and deliver a range of communications and engagement activities for the gbMSM community including posters at social venues and events, social media messaging, adverts and news pieces in gbMSM media, out-reach activities and community stakeholder events. This collaborative and peerled approach ensured the delivery of key messaging that is intended to be informative but not stigmatising. It has been recognised as an example of best practice for risk communication and community engagement on mpox by ECDC and the WHO.19, 20 Vaccination On 27 May 2022, Ireland’s National Immunisation Advisory Committee (NIAC) recommended that modified Vaccinia Ankara-Bavarian Nordic (MVA-BN), be offered to high and intermediate risk contacts of a case of mpox as PEP and healthcare workers at highest risk of exposure as pre-exposure prophylaxis (PREP).21 On 13 June 2022, the first doses of MVA-BN vaccine were delivered to community vaccination centres (CVCs), where PEP was primarily administered, occasionally supported by mobile vaccination teams, hospitals, and PHA teams.21 On 29 July 2022, NIAC recommended mpox vaccine as PrEP to those at high risk of exposure. Given the limited vaccine supply in the context of a global outbreak, the HSE through the advice and guidance of clinical and ethical experts and by working closely with gbMSM advocacy and support groups, offered PrEP in a phased manner. In the first phase (commencing August 2022), eligible people (gbMSM and transgender people who had a notification of early infectious syphilis between December 2021 and July 2022) were invited for vaccination in sexual health clinics. In November 2022, PrEP vaccination was extended to self-identified individuals at risk of mpox who could register online for vaccination and was administered in CVCs.23
Based on advice of the EMA, on 22 August NIAC endorsed lower dose intradermal administration rather than subcutaneous administration. This increased the number of people who could be offered vaccination23, 24. By the end of May 2023, 5,214 people had been fully vaccinated.
