The 2024 Annual Meeting of Stockholders of Tripadvisor, Inc., a Delaware corporation, will be held on Tuesday, June 11, 2024,
at 11:00 a.m. Eastern Time. The Annual Meeting will be held via the Internet and will be a completely virtual meeting. You may attend
the Annual Meeting, submit questions, and vote your shares electronically during the meeting via the Internet by visiting
www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/TRIP2024. To enter the Annual Meeting, you will need the 16-digit control number that is printed
in the box marked by the arrow on your proxy card. We recommend logging in at least fifteen minutes before the meeting to ensure that
you are correctly logged in when the Annual Meeting begins. The online check-in will start shortly before the Annual Meeting on June
11, 2024. At the Annual Meeting, stockholders will be asked to consider and vote on the following proposals:
1. To elect the ten directors named in this Proxy Statement, each to serve for a one-year term from the date of his or her
election and until such director’s successor is elected or until such director’s earlier resignation or removal;
2. To ratify the appointment of KPMG LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal year ending
December 31, 2024;
3. To approve, on a non-binding advisory basis, the compensation of our named executive officers;
4. To vote, on a non-binding advisory basis, on the frequency of future advisory resolutions to approve the compensation
of our named executive officers;
5. To vote on the stockholder proposal requesting a report on implementation of the Global Human Rights Policy
concerning operations in CAHRAs; and
6. To consider and act upon any other business that may properly come before the Annual Meeting and any adjournments
or postponements thereof.
Only holders of record of outstanding shares of Tripadvisor capital stock at the close of business on April 15, 2024 are entitled to
notice of and to vote at the Annual Meeting and at any adjournments or postponements thereof. We will furnish the Notice of Annual
Meeting of Stockholders, Proxy Statement and Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2023 over the
Internet. Whether or not you plan to attend the Annual Meeting, we encourage you to access and read the accompanying Proxy
Statement. We will send to our stockholders a Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials on or about April 26, 2024, and provide
access to our proxy materials over the Internet to our holders of record and beneficial owners of our capital stock as of the close of
business on the record date. You may request paper copies by following the instructions on the Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy
Materials.