The promise of an augmented reality game—Pokémon GO
 

 Recent advances in technology facilitate the promoting of
 physical activity (1-8). This is important due to the health
 effect of physical activity and the reach and disseminability
 of technology based programs/interventions. Specifically,
 Pokémon GO (released in 2016) may promote a higher
 degree of activity than many previous exergames such
 as Nintendo Wii Fit (released in 2007). Pokémon GO uses
 augmented reality (AR), which is similar to virtual reality
 but the key concept for it is ‘utility’ instead of ‘presence’.
 Pokémon GO encourages players to walk around, to socialize,
 and even to make friends. AR is a promising concept in
 that it allows for another type of tailoring of interventions,
 namely geographic tailoring to an individual’s environment.
 According to recent studies, Pokémon GO increased
 physical activity and decreased sedentary behaviors (1-3);
 however, its long-term effect is unknown at this point. In
 one of the studies, players had gone back to their baseline
 physical activity levels within six weeks of their first
 installing the game (2). The real test of the technology
 based AR game for promoting physical activity is whether
 participants continue to engage in the game over longer
 periods of time. It only took 19 days to reach 50 million
 downloads and in September, 2016 Pokémon GO reached
 500 million downloads. However, since September, 2016
 player numbers are on the decline which raises the question
 if this game is following the trajectory of most technology
 games and only be maintained by those who are hard core
 gamers.
 Data show that respondents were somewhat more likely
 to be younger, white, and female; however, there were no
 significant demographic interactions for any behavioral
 indicator (1-3). At least one study indicated that Pokémon
 GO may be more beneficial for more obese individuals (3).
 It was noted that if Pokémon GO players would increase
 1,000 steps daily, and this behavior change would be
 sustained, about 41 days of additional life expectancy would
 be assumed (1). So the public health impact potential is
 substantial.
 It is recommended that researchers apply theoretical
 constructs of health behavior theory (HBT) for behavior
 change to promote physical activity (6,7). For example,
 SuperBetter includes tailored educational elements based
 on HBT, such as individualized assistance and feedback on
 each player’s achievement/improvement. Systematic reviews
 report that the most prevalent theoretical constructs of
 health intervention games were self-monitoring, goal
 setting, and self-reward (6,9). Health interventions, which
 are designed based on theoretical frameworks, are likely
 to lead to longer behavior change (7). Therefore, there is
 a need for researchers to assess theoretical contents and
 gamification elements of Pokémon GO (4,5).
 T h e r e a r e m a n y g a m e s d e v e l o p e d i n a c a d e m i a
 incorporating theoretical constructs for health behavior
 change interventions; however, very few become popular.
 Limited funding for development budgets and speed
 of implementation including testing, publishing, and
 implementing in a real-world make it challenging (10).
 Therefore, it is worth while studying which, either entertainment-based games or educational elements-
 based games, is more popular, engages long-term behavior
 change, and elevates player’s motivation (7).
 In addition, in order to increase the level of scientific
 evidence for the interventions, it is important to develop
 and adopt standardized protocols in terms of interventions,
 populations, and outcomes. This effort eventually
 will allow further comparison between differently
 designed experimental studies to translate evidence-
 based interventions to gaming-based approaches (10).
 Collaborations between game developers, app designers,
 and content experts in behavior health are necessary (7).
 It is also recommended that researchers explore the
 potential benefits of applying Pokémon GO to other areas
 such as depression, heart disease, type 2 diabetes, etc.
 and to diverse study subjects such as children, elders, and
 people with disabilities (1,2,8,10). It has been reported that
 older adult players have an awareness in playing games for
 favorable health outcomes (8). Further research, therefore,
 should be conducted to identify end user’s needs assessment
 and specific GUI (graphical user interface) elements,
 develop human-centered gaming design guidelines, and
 evaluate usability issues.
 Considering the characters (the Pokémons) of Pokémon
 GO appear to be “on top of” the real world, not “in” the
 real world, players may expect another stage of mixed reality
 (combining AR and virtual reality) with the concept of
 ‘flexibility’ where their illusion is not easily broken. In other
 words, when we lean in close the Pokémons get larger, and
 when we walk around the virtual landscape changes with
 respect to the position in the way a real object would (like
 Minecraft—latest update released in 2016—as an example
 of an interactive virtual world). This natural and intuitive
 way of interaction simplifies the communication between
 players and Pokémon GO, especially for players who have
 no previous experience. Therefore, with a mixed reality
 interface, it is expected that Pokémon GO would have the
 potential to be more sustainable and effective.
 Even though larger robust longitudinal studies
 employing rigorous methodologies and further research on
 negative effects such as injuries, road traffic incidents, game
 addiction, etc. are still needed (1-3,10,11), Pokémon GO is
 emerging as a potentially useful tool for motivational and
 behavioral impacts on physical activity.