A 2021 report from the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) found that private equity
investments in health care substantially expanded in the preceding 20 years, particularly with respect to
acquisitions of health care providers, including hospitals, physician groups, and nursing homes. While the
overall significance of these investments to the health care sector is disputed, they have attracted
regulatory, legislative, and academic interest, particularly in the midst of ongoing conversations about
health care quality and costs.
Scrutiny often focuses on the structure and incentives of private equity investment in health care. Private
equity funds typically aim to acquire portfolio companies, increase their value, and exit from these
investments, generally in a defined time frame. The structure of private equity can involve an array of
corporate entities, which may generally shield fund managers and investors from liability. Regulators
have expressed concern that these institutional features may give private equity firms an “undue focus on
short-term profits and aggressive cost-cutting” that creates unique risks relative to other market
participants, with impacts on patient care and competition. For example, MedPAC’s report details
ongoing debates regarding the effects of private equity efforts to increase profitability in health care
investments by increasing revenue while reducing costs. On the other hand, private equity representatives
and other stakeholders argue that such efforts can improve both efficiency and patient care, and that
private equity has been scapegoated for broader issues in the health care system.
In December 2023, the Biden Administration announced that federal agencies, including the Department
of Justice (DOJ), the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC), would take increased actions to lower health care costs, increase quality, and protect
consumers. As part of this effort, the agencies released a Request for Information (RFI) soliciting public
comments on the effects of private equity investments on patients and health care workers. The agencies
argued that “[a]cademic research and agency experience in enforcement actions” have demonstrated that
“patients, health care workers, and others may suffer negative consequences” as a result of these
investments in the health care sector.
Although there is limited federal law that directly addresses private equity ownership in health care,
private equity firms and funds have recently faced claims alongside their portfolio companies in the
health care sector under federal laws concerning both fraudulent and anticompetitive behavior. Legal
commentators have noted the increased legal risk such trends create for private equity investors, whose
involvement in managing portfolio businesses may support alleged knowledge of wrongdoing. This Legal
Sidebar explores recent regulatory and enforcement activities involving private equity investments in
health care under federal antitrust law and the False Claims Act, including efforts to hold private equity
firms and funds directly liable alongside portfolio companies.
The term private equity is often used to refer to a variety of investments that typically pool private funds
from specific, qualified investors for a set period of time and use them to purchase controlling interests in
operating businesses, known as portfolio companies. Private equity funds are generally structured as
limited partnerships; the general partners manage the fund’s investments, and limited partners are those
that invest in the fund but are not directly involved in its operation. A private equity firm may serve as the
general partner for multiple funds, each with their own limited partners and portfolio companies. The
qualified investors who invest as limited partners include pension plans, other private funds, foreign
institutional investors, insurance companies, and high-net-worth individuals. Investments in portfolio
companies could take the form of leveraged buyouts. For more information on the private equity industry
generally, including its structure, size, and common terminology, see CRS Report R47053, Private Equity
and Capital Markets Policy, by Eva Su.
The typical structure of a private equity fund will thus involve several separate entities, all of which are
distinct from the portfolio companies controlled by the fund. Portfolio companies may themselves consist
of a collection of separate legal entities, including corporations and limited liability companies (LLCs).
Under general principles of corporate law, the shareholders of a corporation and the members of an LLC
are ordinarily not liable for the entity’s obligations. Instead, they risk only the amount they have invested
in the business.
These principles do not always shield owners from liability. In some rare circumstances, the corporate
entity may be disregarded and liability imposed upon the company’s owners for corporate conduct, a
process called piercing the corporate veil. Owners of a company may also be held directly liable for their
own conduct, separate from the company’s conduct or liability.

