3/10/24, 10:58 AM FDA Approves First Nonprescription Daily Oral Contraceptive | FDA

FDA NEWS RELEASE

FDA Approves First Nonprescription Daily Oral
Contraceptive

For Immediate Release:
July 13, 2023

Espanol (https:/Awww.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/la-fda-aprueba-el-primer-anticonceptivo-oral-diario-sin-receta)

Today, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Opill (norgestrel) tablet for nonprescription use to
prevent pregnancy— the first daily oral contraceptive approved for use in the U.S. without a prescription.
Approval of this progestin-only oral contraceptive pill provides an option for consumers to purchase oral
contraceptive medicine without a prescription at drug stores, convenience stores and grocery stores, as well as
online.

The timeline for availability and price of this nonprescription product is determined by the manufacturer.
Other approved formulations and dosages of other oral contraceptives will remain available by prescription
only.

“Today’s approval marks the first time a nonprescription daily oral contraceptive will be an
available option for millions of people in the United States,” said Patrizia Cavazzoni, M.D.,
director of the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “When used as directed, daily
oral contraception is safe and is expected to be more effective than currently available
nonprescription contraceptive methods in preventing unintended pregnancy.”

Nonprescription availability of Opill may reduce barriers to access by allowing individuals to obtain an oral
contraceptive without the need to first see a health care provider. Almost half of the 6.1 million pregnancies in
the U.S. each year are unintended. Unintended pregnancies have been linked to negative maternal and
perinatal outcomes, including reduced likelihood of receiving early prenatal care and increased risk of preterm
delivery, with associated adverse neonatal, developmental and child health outcomes. Availability of
nonprescription Opill may help reduce the number of unintended pregnancies and their potential negative
impacts.

The contraceptive efficacy of norgestrel was established with the original approval for prescription use in 1973.

ription-nonprescription-rx-ote-switches) to switch norgestrel from a prescription to an over-the-
counter product. For approval of a product for use in the nonprescription setting, the FDA requires that the
applicant demonstrate
(https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2023/0170310rigisogiSumR.pdf) that the product

can be used by consumers safely and effectively, relying only on the nonprescription drug labeling without any
assistance from a health care professional. Studies showed that consumer understanding of information on the
Opill Drug Facts label was high overall and that a high proportion of consumers understood the label
instructions, supporting their ability to properly use the drug when it is available as an over-the-counter
product. When properly used, Opill is safe and effective.

https:/Awww.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-nonprescription-daily-oral-contraceptive
3/10/24, 10:58 AM FDA Approves First Nonprescription Daily Oral Contraceptive | FDA
Opill should be taken at the same time every day; adherence to daily use at the same time of day is important
for the effectiveness of Opill. Using medications that interact with Opill can result in decreased efficacy of Opill
or the other medication, or both, potentially resulting in unintended pregnancy.

The most common side effects of Opill include irregular bleeding, headaches, dizziness, nausea, increased
appetite, abdominal pain, cramps or bloating.

Opill should not be used by those who have or have ever had breast cancer. Consumers who have any other
form of cancer should ask a doctor before use. Opill also should not be used together with another hormonal
birth control product such as another oral contraceptive tablet, a vaginal ring, a contraceptive patch, a
contraceptive implant, a contraceptive injection or an IUD (intra-uterine device).

Use of Opill may be associated with changes in vaginal bleeding patterns, such as irregular spotting and
prolonged bleeding. Consumers should inform a health care provider if they develop repeated vaginal bleeding
after sex, or prolonged episodes of bleeding or amenorrhea (absence of menstrual period). Individuals who
miss two periods (or have missed a single period and have missed doses of Opill) or suspect they may be
pregnant should take a pregnancy test. Consumers should discontinue Opill if pregnancy is confirmed.

Opill is not for use as emergency contraception and does not prevent pregnancy after unprotected sex. Oral
contraceptives do not protect against transmission of HIV, AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases such
as chlamydia, genital herpes, genital warts, gonorrhea, hepatitis B and syphilis. Condoms should be used to
prevent sexually transmitted diseases.

The FDA granted the approval to Laboratoire HRA Pharma, recently acquired by Perrigo Company ple.

Related Information
* Drugs@FDA: Opill (http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm?

event=overview.process&varAppINo=017031),

* Decisional Memo

(https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2023/0170310rigisog1SumR.pdf)

© Opill (0.075mg Oral Norgestrel Tablet) Information (http://www.fda.gov/drugs/postmarket-drug-safety-
information-patients-and-providers/opill-oo75mg-oral-norgestrel-tablet-information),

HEF

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by
assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological
products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our
nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for
regulating tobacco products.

Inquiries
Media:

Jeremy Kahn (mailto: Jeremy. kahn@fda.hhs.gov)
& (301) 796-8671

https:/Awww.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-nonprescription-daily-oral-contraceptive
3/10/24, 10:58 AM FDA Approves First Nonprescription Daily Oral Contraceptive | FDA
Consumer:

&. 888-INFO-FDA

Was this helpful?

@ More Press Announcements (/news-events/newsroom/press-announcements)

https://Awww.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-nonprescription-daily-oral-contraceptive 3/3