II. ORIGINATION THROUGH POST-CLOSING/ENDORSEMENT
 B. Title II Insured Housing Programs Reverse Mortgages
 2. Origination/Processing
 Handbook 4000.1 589
 Last Revised: 05/20/2024
 Mortgagee must determine whether the recorded Declaration and/or CC&Rs
 require prior approval by the association of any non-purchase money mortgage
 that will encumber the Property. In those situations where such a requirement
 exists, the Mortgagee must obtain the approval of the association in writing prior
 to origination of the HECM. Documentation concerning this approval must be
 maintained by the Mortgagee and made available to HUD upon request.
 (7) Property Assessed Clean Energy
 (a) Definition
 Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) refers to an alternative means of
 financing energy and other PACE-allowed improvements to residential
 properties using financing provided by private enterprises in conjunction with
 state and local governments. Generally, the repayment of the PACE obligation
 is collected in the same manner as a special assessment tax; it is collected by
 the local government rather than paid directly by the Borrower to the party
 providing the PACE financing. Generally, the PACE obligation is also
 secured in the same manner as a special assessment against the property.
 (b) Standard
 Properties which will remain encumbered with a PACE obligation are not
 eligible for an FHA-insured HECM. To be eligible for FHA insurance, the
 PACE obligation must be paid off in full prior to or at closing. The Borrower
 may use HECM proceeds to satisfy the PACE obligation. For HECM for
 Purchase transactions, see the Property Assessed Clean Energy section of the
 product sheet.
 (B) Property Types
 FHA’s programs differ from one another primarily in terms of what types of
 Properties and financing are eligible. Except as otherwise stated in this Handbook
 4000.1, HECMs are limited to one- to four-unit Single Family Properties where the
 Borrower occupies one unit as their Principal Residence. FHA insures HECM
 financing on Real Property secured by:
 • detached or semi-detached dwellings
 • Manufactured Housing
 • townhouses or row houses
 • Condominium Units and Site Condominiums
 FHA will not insure HECMs secured by:
 • commercial enterprises
 • cooperative units
 • boarding houses
 • hotels, motels, and condotels
 II. ORIGINATION THROUGH POST-CLOSING/ENDORSEMENT
 B. Title II Insured Housing Programs Reverse Mortgages
 2. Origination/Processing
 Handbook 4000.1 590
 Last Revised: 05/20/2024
 • tourist houses
 • private clubs
 • bed and breakfast establishments
 • other transient housing
 • Vacation Homes
 • fraternity and sorority houses
 (1) One-Unit
 A one-unit Property is a Single Family residential Property with a single Dwelling
 Unit, or with a single Dwelling Unit and a single ADU.
 (2) Two-Unit
 (a) Definition
 A two-unit Property is a Single Family residential Property with two
 individual dwellings.
 (b) Standard
 The Mortgagee must obtain a completed form HUD-92561.
 (3) Three- to Four-Unit
 A three- to four-unit Property is either:
 • a Single Family residential Property with three to four individual Dwelling
 Units; or
 • a Single Family residential Property with two individual Dwelling Units
 and one ADU or three individual Dwelling Units and one ADU.
 The Mortgagee must obtain a completed form HUD-92561.
 (4) Accessory Dwelling Unit
 (a) Definition
 An Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) refers to a single habitable living unit
 with means of separate ingress and egress that meets the minimum
 requirements for a living unit. An ADU is a private space that is subordinate
 in size and within, or detached from a primary one-unit Single Family
 dwelling, which together constitute a single interest in real estate.
 (b) Standard
 A Single Family residential one-unit Property with a single ADU remains a
 one-unit Property. For any Single Family residential Property with two or
 II. ORIGINATION THROUGH POST-CLOSING/ENDORSEMENT
 B. Title II Insured Housing Programs Reverse Mortgages
 2. Origination/Processing
 Handbook 4000.1 591
 Last Revised: 05/20/2024
 more units, a separate additional Dwelling Unit must be considered as an
 additional unit.
 (5) Condominium Unit
 (a) Definitions
 A Condominium Unit refers to real estate consisting of a one-family Dwelling
 Unit in a Condominium Project.
 Condominium Project refers to a project in which one-family Dwelling Units
 are attached, semi-detached, detached, or Manufactured Home units, and in
 which owners hold an undivided interest in Common Elements.
 (b) Standard
 A Condominium Unit must be either located within an FHA-approved
 Condominium Project, meet FHA’s definition of a Site Condominium, or have
 completed the FHA Single-Unit Approval process before a Mortgage can be
 insured.
 (6) Site Condominiums
 (a) Definition
 A Site Condominium refers to:
 • a Condominium Project that consists entirely of Single Family
 detached dwellings that have no shared garages, or any other attached
 buildings; or
 • a Condominium Project that:
  consists of Single Family detached or horizontally attached
 (townhouse-style) dwellings where the Unit consists of the
 dwelling and land;
  does not contain any Manufactured Housing Units; and
  is encumbered by a declaration of condominium covenants or a
 condominium form of ownership.
 (b) Standard
 Manufactured Housing condominium units may not be processed as Site
 Condominiums.
 The Unit owner must be responsible for all required insurance and
 maintenance costs associated with the Unit dwelling, excluding landscaping,
 of the Site Condominium.
 II. ORIGINATION THROUGH POST-CLOSING/ENDORSEMENT
 B. Title II Insured Housing Programs Reverse Mortgages
 2. Origination/Processing
 Handbook 4000.1 592
 Last Revised: 05/20/2024
 Site Condominiums do not require Condominium Project Approval or Single-
 Unit Approval.
 Manufactured Housing
 (a) Definition
 Manufactured Housing is a Structure that is transportable in one or more
 sections. It may be part of a Condominium Project, provided the project meets
 applicable FHA requirements.
 (b) Standard
 To be eligible for FHA mortgage insurance as a Single Family Title II HECM,
 all Manufactured Housing must:
 • be designed as a one-family dwelling;
 • have a floor area of not less than 400 square feet;
 • have the HUD Certification Label affixed or have obtained a letter of
 label verification issued on behalf of HUD, evidencing the house was
 constructed on or after June 15, 1976, in compliance with the Federal
 Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards;
 • be classified as real estate (but need not be treated as real estate for
 purposes of state taxation);
 • be built and remain on a permanent chassis;
 • be designed to be used as a dwelling with a permanent foundation built
 in accordance with the Permanent Foundations Guide for
 Manufactured Housing (PFGMH); and
 • have been directly transported from the manufacturer or the dealership
 to the site.
 (c) Required Documentation
 (i) HUD Certification Label
 If the appraisal indicates the HUD Certification Label is missing from the
 Manufactured Housing unit, the Mortgagee must obtain label verification
 from the Institute for Building Technology and Safety (IBTS).
 (ii) PFGMH Certification
 The Mortgagee must obtain a certification by an engineer or architect, who
 is licensed/registered in the state where the Manufactured Home is
 located, attesting to compliance with the PFGMH.
 The Mortgagee may obtain a copy of the foundation certification from a
 previous FHA-insured Mortgage, showing that the foundation met the
 guidelines published in the PFGMH that were in effect at the time of
 II. ORIGINATION THROUGH POST-CLOSING/ENDORSEMENT
 B. Title II Insured Housing Programs Reverse Mortgages
 2. Origination/Processing
 Handbook 4000.1 593
 Last Revised: 05/20/2024
 certification, provided there are no alterations and/or observable damage
 to the foundation since the date of the original certification.
 If the Appraiser notes additions or alterations to the Manufactured
 Housing unit, the Mortgagee must ensure the addition was addressed in
 the foundation certification.
 If the additions or alterations were not addressed in the foundation
 certification, the Mortgagee must obtain:
 • an inspection by the state administrative agency that inspects
 Manufactured Housing for compliance; or
 • certification of the structural integrity from a licensed structural
 engineer if the state does not employ inspectors