On August 8, 2020, President Trump signed a presidential memorandum expressing his view that payments and interest accrual on student loans should remain suspended past September 30, 2020, “until such time that the economy has stabilized, schools have re-opened, and the crisis brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided.” The memorandum directs the Secretary of Education to “continue the temporary cessation of payments and the waiver of all interest on student loans held by the Department of Education until December 31, 2020.” 
The memorandum cites Section 455(f)(2)(D) of the Higher Education Act (HEA), which allows eligible borrowers to defer certain federally held student loans if they experience economic hardship. Such a deferment temporarily relieves the borrower of an obligation to pay principal installments on the loan. For some (but not all) loans, a deferment also temporarily suspends the accrual of loan interest. 
To implement the proposed suspension of payments and interest accrual, the presidential memorandum directs the Secretary of Education “to take action pursuant to applicable law to effectuate appropriate waivers of and modifications to the requirements and conditions of economic hardship deferment described in” HEA Section 455(f)(2)(D). Under HEA Section 435(o)—which Section 455(f)(2)(D) incorporates by reference—a borrower is eligible for an economic hardship deferment if the borrower is (1) working full-time and (2) earning an amount of money that falls below a specified threshold. But HEA Sections 455(f)(2)(D) and 435(o) also authorize the Secretary of Education to promulgate regulations making additional borrowers eligible for an economic hardship deferment. The Secretary of Education previously issued regulations making economic hardship deferments available to certain borrowers who might not otherwise meet the criteria specified in Section 435(o). 
The presidential memorandum contemplates that the Secretary of Education will exercise available statutory authorities to further expand economic hardship deferment eligibility to borrowers adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The presidential memorandum may raise several questions for policymakers. First, as mentioned above, a deferment under Section 455(f) does not suspend interest accrual for all types of student loans. To the contrary, Section 435(f)(1)(B) states that for certain loans, interest “shall accrue and be capitalized or paid by the borrower” during the deferment period. It therefore may be uncertain whether Section 455(f), standing alone, allows the Executive to waive “all interest on student loans held by the Department of Education” as the presidential memorandum contemplates. That said, the presidential memorandum directs the Secretary of Education to take action pursuant to “applicable law” to effectuate the memorandum’s directives. The Trump Administration might attempt to argue that other provisions of federal law give the Secretary of Education the power to waive all interest on student loans held by the Department of Education, even if Section 455 does not. 
Second, the memorandum does not explicitly specify who will be eligible for the expanded economic hardship deferments. The memorandum appears to contemplate, however, that the Secretary of Education will make those deferments available to all borrowers who are currently covered by the CARES Act’s payment and interest suspension provisions. 
Third, while the presidential memorandum states that “[a]ll persons who wish to continue making student loan payments shall be allowed to do so,” it does not specify whether borrowers will need to apply for the deferments, or if the Secretary of Education will instead automatically grant deferments to eligible borrowers unless they opt out. Under existing regulations, deferment is (with limited exceptions) not automatic; a borrower must usually request a deferment and submit an application containing various documents. Although the Secretary of Education could potentially amend those regulations to automatically grant deferments, doing so could have both advantages and disadvantages. On one hand, dispensing with the requirement that borrowers file an application to receive a deferment could reduce burdens on both borrowers and the federal government. On the other hand, some borrowers might prefer not to receive an automatic deferment, preferring to continue paying off their loans. For instance, some student loan forgiveness programs—such as the Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) Program— require the borrower to make payments over an extended period to receive relief. 
Fourth, Section 3513 of the CARES Act affords borrowers certain types of relief that the presidential memorandum does not mention. For instance: 
• Section 3513(e) suspends involuntary collection on student loans covered by the CARES Act’s principal and interest suspension provisions. 
• Section 3513(d) affords borrowers certain consumer credit reporting protections during the suspension period. 
• Section 3513(c) requires the Secretary of Education to “deem each month for which a loan payment was suspended” under the CARES Act as if the borrower “had made a payment for the purpose of any loan forgiveness program or loan rehabilitation program,” such as the PSLF program. 
The memorandum does not expressly address these topics. Notably, however, when the Trump Administration took administrative action in March 2020 to grant relief to student loan borrowers, the Secretary of Education instructed the U.S. Treasury and collection agencies to cease involuntary collection actions and wage garnishments for at least 60 days. 
Also, it is presently unclear whether the Secretary of Education will give stakeholders an opportunity to comment on any regulations she might promulgate to implement the memorandum. Federal law ordinarily requires the Secretary of Education to engage in a negotiated rulemaking process with stakeholders and accept and consider public comments before a regulation governing student loans becomes effective. But the Secretary of Education may bypass these procedures when following them would be “impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest.” Given the significant and continuing impact of COVID-19 and Section 3513’s impending expiration date, the Secretary of Education might be able to publish regulations to implement aspects of the memorandum that become effective immediately, without first accepting public comment.
