While we all know that organic, non-GMO fruits and vegetables of any kind are good for us, some are far better than others. Fortunately, many crowd favorites such as spinach, kale, and collard greens are packed with vitamins, minerals, fiber, and even protein. Not to mention, dark leafy greens are very versatile and can be incorporated into your diet in fun, delicious ways.
 

 If you still need convincing, I’m about to tell you about all the amazing benefits of leafy greens.
 Unless you’ve been taking notes, you might have missed all the leafy greens I’ve mentioned so far. Don’t worry! I’ve put together this convenient list of the healthiest leafy green vegetables for you to reference:
 

 Kale
 Spinach
 Collard greens
 Broccoli
 Broccoli sprouts
 Cabbage
 Beet greens
 Watercress
 Arugula
 Mustard greens
 Swiss chard
 Bok choy
 Romaine lettuce
 Raw Vegetables vs. Cooked Vegetables: Which is Better?
 I get asked all the time if it’s better to eat raw or cooked vegetables. The answer may surprise you! While eating raw vegetables provides your body with optimal levels of folate and water-soluble vitamins, the nutrients in cooked vegetables are actually easier to digest and absorb. However, I’m going to let you in on the most delicious and easiest way to enough leafy greens in your diet – Organic Greens!
 

 The Best Way to Get More Leafy Greens
 While it’s ideal to get these incredible benefits from real, whole foods, not all of these foods are always available, in season, or grown in optimal soil. It can be difficult to get the benefits of leafy greens from diet alone. 
 

 That’s why Organic Greens is a great option to have when you’re just too busy to prepare a big salad or smoothie, or when you’re looking to stay healthy while on the go.
 

 One scoop of Organic Greens is a nutritional powerhouse, containing 14 USDA-certified organic plant foods, including green superstars spinach, kale, alfalfa, moringa, and broccoli sprouts. 
 

 It’s perfect for anyone who:
 

 Is looking to save a lot of time versus juicing their produce every morning
 Needs a tasty, inexpensive alternative to pricey juice bar offerings
 Travels often and wants a doctor-designed source of organic nutrition while eating out
 Wants to mitigate stress and balanced hormone health
 Organic Greens is an easy and convenient way to ensure you’re getting all the amazing benefits of leafy greens! I drink a glass every day! 
 

 Adding more leafy greens into your diet is a great way to support optimal health, reduce bloating, facilitate a healthy stress response, support bone health, healthy aging, and gut health, and help reduce oxidative damage from free radicals. Leafy greens are the nutritional powerhouse!
 

 Benefits of Leafy Greens FAQs
 What are the benefits of dark leafy greens?
 Adding more green leafy vegetables into your diet can support optimal brain health, fight belly bloat, relieve stress, support bone health, healthy aging, boost digestive enzymes, and tame the toxins, among many other health benefits.
 

 What are the best leafy green vegetables?
 The best leafy vegetables include spinach, kale, collard greens, chard, turnip greens, arugula, and watercress.
 

 How often should I eat leafy greens?
 According to the USDA, the optimal amount of leafy greens is between 3-5 servings per day. That’s a lot! By far, the easiest way to get your optimal daily intake of leafy green vegetables is Organic Greens.