Legislative History
Congress enacted the UCMJ in 1950, and it entered into force in 1951. At the time of enactment, Article
43 provided that there was no statute of limitations for “desertion or absence without leave in time of war,
or with aiding the enemy, mutiny, or murder” and set a three-year statute of limitations for most other
offenses, including rape. Article 120 provided that a person guilty of rape “shall be punished by death or
such other punishment as a court-martial may direct.” Article 55, then as now, prohibits “[p]unishment by
flogging, or by branding, marking, or tattooing on the body, or any other cruel or unusual punishment.”
Amendments to Article 43
As relevant to Briggs and Collins, Congress has amended Article 43 three times. In 1986, Congress
provided that there was no statute of limitations for “any offense punishable by death” and set a five-year
statute of limitations for most other offenses. These statutes of limitations mirrored their civilian
counterparts, which are codified at 18 U.S.C. § 3281 for offenses punishable by death, and § 3282 for
other offenses. Congress again amended Article 43 in 2003, setting a twenty-five-year statute of
limitations for child abuse offenses, including rape of a child under Article 120. Most recently, Congress
amended Article 43 in the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 (2006 NDAA) in a
section titled “Extension of Statute of Limitations for Murder, Rape, and Child Abuse Offenses under the
[UCMJ].” The 2006 amendments provided that there is no statute of limitations for “murder or rape, or
[for] any other offenses punishable by death” and modified the twenty-five-year statute of limitations for
child abuse offenses other than rape. In an accompanying report, the Senate Committee on Armed
Services described the amendments as “clarify[ing] that all murders are included in the class of offenses
that has an unlimited statute of limitations . . . [and] includ[ing] rape in that class of offenses.”
Amendments to Article 120
As with Article 43, Congress has amended Article 120 several times since its enactment. Of note, in the
2006 NDAA, Congress amended Article 120 to specify that a person guilty of rape “shall be punished as a
court-martial may direct,” removing the statutory authority to punish rape by death.
Judicial Interpretations
Before Briggs and Collins, the Supreme Court had not interpreted Articles 43, 55, or 120, but several
lower courts, including the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces (CAAF), had done so. Three
cases are particularly relevant to Briggs and Collins. First, in the 1983 case United States v. Matthews, the
CAAF (then known as the U.S. Court of Military Appeals) addressed whether Article 55 protected
servicemembers from cruel and unusual punishment in the same manner as the Eighth Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution. Specifically, the court considered whether the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition on
cruel and unusual punishment barred the imposition of the death penalty on a servicemember found guilty
of rape and murder. The court held that “a servicemember is entitled both by statute [under Article 55]
and under the Eighth Amendment to protection against ‘cruel and unusual punishments.’” It recognized,
however, that, “since in many ways the military community is unique, . . . there may be circumstances
under which the rules governing capital punishment of servicemembers will be different from those
applicable to civilians.”
Congressional Research Service 3
In dicta, the Matthews court further observed that, while “Congress obviously intended that in cases
where an accused servicemember is convicted of . . . rape, the court-martial members should have the
option to adjudge a death sentence,” this intent “[p]robably . . . cannot be constitutionally effectuated in a
case where the rape of an adult female is involved, . . . at least, where there is no purpose unique to the
military mission that would be served by allowing the death penalty for this offense.” The court based its
reasoning on the Supreme Court’s 1977 holding in Coker v. Georgia that “a sentence of death is grossly
disproportionate and excessive punishment for the crime of rape and is therefore forbidden by the Eighth
Amendment as cruel and unusual punishment.”
Second, in the 1998 case Willenbring v. Neurauter, the CAAF held there was no statute of limitations for
rape, relying on the contemporaneous language of Articles 43(a) (“A person charged . . . with any offense
punishable by death, may be tried and punished at any time without limitation”) and 120(a) (any person
“guilty of rape . . . shall be punished by death or such other punishment as a court-martial may direct”).
The CAAF considered its decision in Matthews and the Supreme Court’s decision in Coker but held that
the 1986 amendment to Article 43 “was meant to apply to the most serious offenses without listing each
one in the statute.” The CAAF concluded that rape under Article 120 was an offense that Congress
deemed punishable by death, regardless of whether such a sentence constitutionally could be imposed.
Third, and most recently, in the 2018 case United States v. Mangahas, the CAAF overruled Willenbring.
Relying on Coker, the CAAF reasoned that where “there is no set of circumstances under which the death
penalty could constitutionally be imposed for the rape of an adult woman, that offense is simply not
‘punishable by death.’” Recognizing that “Willenbring gave short shrift to this highly salient point,” the
court overruled its prior decision. The CAAF concluded that because rape was not constitutionally
punishable by death, rapes committed between 1986 and 2006 are subject to a five-year statute of
limitations under Article 43
