Recent research has identified the major motivations and constraints around vegetarian and vegan
diets [30 ]. The main motivations to move towards a vegetarian or vegan diet are animal welfare,
the environment and personal health, whilst the major barriers are sensory enjoyment of animal
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6844 3 of 17
products, convenience and financial cost [ 30 ]. Mullee et al. [31 ] found that, when asked about
possible reasons for eating a more vegetarian diet, the most popular option chosen by omnivores
and semivegetarians was their health. The environment and animal welfare were chosen by fewer
participants, and for omnivores, these reasons ranked below ‘to discover new tastes’, ‘to reduce
weight’, and ‘no reason’. This finding has been replicated elsewhere [32 ,33 ] and implies that, for those
not currently reducing their meat consumption, potential personal benefits are more important than
environmental or ethical benefits. More specifically, consumers often recognise health benefits such as
decreased saturated fat intake, increased fruit and vegetable intake and disease prevention [ 32, 34].
On the other hand, some worry about not getting enough protein or iron from a vegetarian diet [35].
Interestingly, this prioritisation of health motives appears to be reversed for vegetarians and
vegans. According to a survey published by Humane League Labs [36], whilst health and nutrition
reasons for reducing animal product consumption are the most commonly cited by omnivores and
semivegetarians, animal welfare is the most common reason given by vegetarians and vegans. This is
logical, because improving one’s health or reducing one’s environmental impact can be achieved by
consuming incrementally fewer animal products; viewing animal products as the product of animal
suffering and exploitation, however, is more conducive to eschewing them altogether.
In a systematic review of consumer perceptions of sustainable protein consumption, Hartmann
and Siegrist [37 ] found that it is common for consumers to underestimate the ecological impact of meat
consumption. This has been observed in many different studies [33 ,38 – 40 ] and may imply a lack
of knowledge about the environmental impact of meat consumption. Alternatively, this could reflect
that consumers are generally unwilling to reduce their meat consumption [40 ] and are subsequently
motivated to minimise their perceptions of the negative consequences of their choices [41].
Indeed, such motivated reasoning appears to be evident with respect to animal welfare issues.
Most people eat meat but disapprove of harming animals, a conflict that has been dubbed ‘the meat
paradox’ [42 ]. Rothgerber [ 43] identified a number of ways in which dissonance around harming
animals arises in meat-eaters, and a number of strategies which are used to reduce this dissonance.
Dissonance-reducing strategies include denial of animal mind, denial of animals’ ability to feel pain
and dissociating meat from its animal origin [ 43 ]. This motivated reasoning results in a number of odd
conclusions, such as lower mental capacity being ascribed to food animals compared to nonfood
animals and increased denial of animal mind when one anticipates immediate meat consumption [ 44].
One can understand the motivation to continue eating animal products; the literature has identified
several considerable constraints to adopting a vegetarian or vegan diet. Studies have consistently
found that the strongest of these is simply enjoyment of eating meat [34 , 45, 46]. This was by far the
number one reason for not being vegetarian in a recent UK survey [ 47 ] and was the biggest constraint
for online survey respondents who indicated that they do not want to go vegetarian or vegan [ 36].
Despite the many potential benefits, the taste of meat and animal products is enough of a barrier
to prevent dietary change for most people.
The second most important barrier is convenience, with many consumers saying vegetarian
dishes are difficult to prepare and that there is a lack of options when eating out [ 33 ,38 ,48 ]. Humane
League Labs [36 ] found that a lack of options when eating out was the most common factor that people
said made it difficult to eat meat-free meals, whilst Schenk, Rössel and Scholz [30 ] have argued that
the additional time, knowledge and effort required to buy and prepare vegetarian or vegan food is
especially a barrier to those newly transitioning diets.
Finally, for some, there is a financial barrier [49], although there is considerably less consensus on
this in the literature [30]. A UK survey found that the high cost of meat substitutes was a barrier for
58% of consumers, though this survey conducted by VoucherCodesPro [ 47 ] may have been inclined
to focus on financial considerations. Another study found that a vegetarian diet is actually cheaper
than one containing meat, but that a vegan diet is most expensive of all [ 22 ]. This may be due to the
relatively high cost of plant-based milks and other specialist products.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6844 4 of 17
The present study investigates UK meat-eaters’ views of various aspects of vegetarianism and
veganism. Whilst the common motivators and constraints to vegetarian and vegan diets are well
documented, there is a paucity of open data assessing how meat-eaters evaluate the relevant aspects
of each of these diets. This study seeks to address this gap by providing quantitative evaluations
of the relevant aspects of vegetarian and vegan diets. Additionally, there is currently no quantitative
comparison of these factors with respect to vegetarianism versus veganism. Therefore, this study
compares ratings of common motivators and barriers between vegetarian and vegan diets. Finally,
little is known about how these evaluations of vegetarian and vegan diets vary amongst different
demographic groups. Therefore, this study examines the overall mean ratings of each of these factors
and investigates how these views vary between different demographics.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants
Meat-eaters living in the UK aged 18 and over were recruited (n = 1000). Participants were
recruited through the online research platform, Prolific, and each participant was paid £0.45 for a 5
min survey. Recruiting participants through this type of online platform has its limitations, including
the possibility of recruiting an unrepresentative sample, and asking questions in a contrived setting
which may not be ecologically valid [ 50]. Nonetheless, this sampling technique does offer low cost
and fast recruitment of specifiable samples, and the use of Prolific as a recruitment tool in academic
research is therefore increasingly common and generally considered acceptable [51 –53 ]. Although
recruitment was for meat-eaters only, there was a small number of vegetarians in the original dataset
(n = 25); these participants were removed, and their responses were replaced with more meat-eaters.
The final sample was 49.8% male and 49.8% female (0.3% did not disclose gender, 0.1% ‘other’), and
the mean age was 34.02 (SD = 11.67).
2.2. Procedure
This study received ethical approval from the University of Bath’s Department of Psychology Ethics
Committee (PREC 18-219). The full anonymised dataset is available via OSF (see Supplementary Materials).
First, participants read some brief information about the study and gave their consent to take part.
They were then given definitions of vegetarianism and veganism and asked to give their opinions about
11 different aspects of vegetarian and vegan diets using 7-point bipolar scales. The order of these scales
and the order in which participants were asked about vegetarianism and veganism were randomised
to control for order effects. Next, participants answered questions about their intended consumption
of meat and their intended consumption of animal products ‘one month from today’. On 6-point scales,
participants could indicate that they would eliminate, greatly reduce, slightly reduce, maintain about
the same, slightly increase or greatly increase their consumption of both meat, and animal products
generally. Similar scales have been used in previous research [54,55].
It is worth noting that this measure is conservative. Compared to asking about intentions to reduce
consumption in general, defining a specific action and a specific, short time period is likely to make
participants reflect critically about their own likely behaviour. Additionally, as participants answered
this question, they saw the phrase ‘Thank you for being honest!’ which was intended to mitigate the
social desirability effect (i.e., over-reporting of intentions to reduce animal product consumption).
Finally, participants gave demographic information, including their age, gender, political
orientation, education and income. They also indicated whether they ate ‘at least occasionally’
beef, lamb, pork, chicken, fish, eggs and dairy. Participants were then debriefed and compensated.