Home > IT applications, infrastructure and operations

FEATURE

~ 20F3

4

P Partof: The CIO's guide to legacy systems

Replacing vs. maintaining legacy systems
Understanding issues such as which systems hinder organizational performance can help IT leaders decide which legacy systems to replace
and which to maintain.
By Mary K. Pratt

Published: 05 Jul 2023

Few CIOs escape the complexity of deciding whether to maintain legacy systems or replace them altogether. The right choice, as with most
things in life, is: It depends.

IT leaders might want to replace a legacy_system because of outdated hardware, increased
security risks or a desire to enable a digital transformation initiative. But replacing existing
systems isn't always in the company's best interest. Legacy systems can remain in place if
the existing system is reliable.
vclo”

Q

Prioritize a strategic assessment

One alternative to completely replacing or maintaining legacy systems is to modernize
them. Modernized systems might be more cost-effective, while increasing efficiency and improving existing processes at the same time.
Michael Bradshaw is currently working through a multiyear plan to modernize the technology at Kyndryl, a New York-based IT services
company.

After about two years of planning and execution, the goal is to complete the big moves by November, he said. A strategic assessment of the
company's existing systems and applications was the first step in the process.
His modernization plan calls for the digitalization of the company's entire business chain, Bradshaw said. Previously, about 1,800
applications supported that chain, but the number should drop to 360 by year's end and eventually down to 300.
His IT team partnered with the business to develop a target, as well as a roadmap on how to get there, he said.
20f34

P

+

The goal of this strategy is to streamline the modernization efforts.
Up Next

The strategic assessment enabled §Tdasisienliyashaylagaeysysiams laimmeripbiigraationmodriizgtion and which could wait,
systems
Bradshaw said.
Slyingwit i-and-rue logacysysems can el ke Undertanding sses such s which ystr
e safot vt Byl as 1o wad changes al a izzying
organizatonal
perormance can ol " T loax
Afocus on competitive advantage heiped Steer the roadmap, foo. -~
el
peroma
"Ultimately, all the systems we provide are to support the execution of business, so you start with the business needs, what's most important
for the business," he said.
Organizations that want to modernize must choose systems that support their objectives.
The company considered cybersecurity concerns, maintenance requirements and operational costs to determine which apps to prioritize for
modernization, Bradshaw said.
Replacing vs. maintaining legacy systems

Many organizations still rely on legacy systems for some of their workloads, which can limit innovation efforts.

Seventy-two percent of all respondents believe that their organization's digital transformation efforts are lagging due to technical debt, while
51% cite a complex legacy IT infrastructure as one of their key challenges over the next year, according to the 2023 report "CIO Pulse: 2023
budgets & priorities” from cloud software provider SoftwareOne, headquartered in Milwaukee.
Yet, many CIOs don't always have a well-formulated path forward. A good portion of IT leaders are unclear on what they should modernize
first and what legacy systems are OK to keep running.

Some might end up shedding a legacy system under duress, said Joe Davey, partner at West Monroe, a digital services firm, headquartered
in Chicago.
"Often, it takes a catalyzing event," Davey said.

In some cases, CIOs replace legacy technologies without a clear strategy in mind.
"[The strategy is] technology for technology's sake." he said. “[But] there's a lack of understanding how that technology can help them get
ahead.”

Although companies eventually need to replace all legacy technology, CIOs don't need to modernize all systems at once - nor is an
undertaking of that magnitude usually possible. Instead, CIOs must determine what legacy systems need to be replaced sooner and which
can be replaced later, both Davey and Bradshaw said.
5 reasons to replace legacy systems

Organizations should carefully evaluate their existing systems before making any changes. IT leaders should understand the following
reasons why legacy systems should be prioritized for modernization.
1. The system creates an unacceptable security risk
Many IT teams can't patch some legacy systems because vendors don't release new patches. Other systems have significant security.

vulnerabilities IT can't address for another reason.

Any such system with "security vulnerabiltties that could bring the [organization] to its knees should be a high priority for replacement,” said
Dave Powner, executive director of the Center for Data-Driven Policy at Mitre Corp., a nonprofit research and development organization,
based in McLean, Va., that provides technical and cybersecurity support to U.S. government agencies.
2. The system hinders the organization’s performance
Inefficient systems can cause delays and decreased productivity.

20f34

P

+

Organizations should prioritize replacing systems that affect efficiency, said Minir Patel, vice president of cloud architecture at Apps
Associates, a consultancy augl NP, headquartered in Acton, Mass.
6 reasons legacy systems are stillinuse

Replacing vs. maintaining legac

Systems by modernizing legacy systems, Powner said.
Enterprises can pursue new opportunities or significantly improve mission cap4Biiieé
Stying win rec-and-ruo legacy systems can feel ke

Understanding issues uch as whih syster

3. The system doesn't fit into the oR§AHIZHESH
S ERUFEEsgaoes ot davng

organzatona poromancecanhalp I lac

Alegacy system without immediate problems can still be a priority for modernization if the processes it supports aren't critical for the
organization's long-term goals.

When developing a modernization strategy, CIOs should focus on where the company wants to be, said Suneel Ghei, principal research
director at Info-Tech Research Group, an IT services management company, based in London, Ont.
4. The system costs too much to maintain
Al systems come with run costs. In some cases, a system’s maintenance costs might exceed its business value, including the cost of
modernizing the system.
Excessive run costs draw resources away from pursuing innovation and new opportunities, Patel said.

CIOs need to do that math and know when they're approaching or have gone past that point so they can take appropriate action.
5. The system is at a high risk of failure
Systems with no vendor support, that depend on obsolete programming languages or are highly customized with scant documentation and
no remaining institutional knowledge of its buildout are highly fragile. Organizations could have a difficult time recovering if the system
should fail.
For example, some businesses have needed help with IT systems but couldn'tfind IT talent to service the systems. It's best to replace those
systems before that happens to ensure business continuity.
3 reasons to maintain legacy systems

Companies can maintain legacy systems under the right circumstances. Here are three reasons to maintain a legacy system that IT leaders
should understand.

1. The system has an acceptable level of risk
Asystem no longer supported by a vendor or built on an obsolete programming language does have security vulnerabilities. But it might not
create unnecessary risks.
For example, a company might rely on the system for a noncritical back-office function. There would be minimal effects on daily operations if
the system failed.
Or the CIO might have or could easily access the talent needed to keep it running at a reasonable cost.

In such cases, the CIO might reasonably opt to make modernizing that system a lower priority.
2. The system still supports the organization's needs
Asystem that meets the organization's needs, while not hindering its ability to pursue new competitive opportunities, is a strong candidate to
stay in place.
Organizations might do themselves a disservice by replacing legacy systems with modern versions they're not ready to use or optimize,
Patel said.

For example, replacing an existing system with a modern app featuring Al might seem like a good strategy. Still, a company needs to have
the maturity required to use the Al component successfully to get ROI that justifies the modernization.
3. The system's processes can be sunsetted or shifted to other systems
20f34

P

+

CIOs might opt to keep a legacy system in place if they know that the business processes it supports will be sunsetted by the organization
or shifted to other systems, pinie¥itin Naik, technical fellow at Mitre Corp.
6 reasons legacy systems are still inuse
Replacing vs. maintaining legac
il
a system that won't't be needed in the future won'te deliver good ROI®
Replacing

%

Next Steps

Stying win rec-and-ruo legacy systems can el ke
Ine slest roue. But 3 the wor changes ata dzzying

vstems

Understanding issues such as whih syster
organizatonalperormance can help I eac

How to modernize apps
as part of the cloud migration process
How to perform an application modernization assessment

%

Dig Deeper on IT applications, infrastructure and operations
bimodal IT (bimodal information technology)

How to modernize legacy applications

By: Linda Tucci

By: Mary Pratt

IT transformation

Defra's tech review reveals legacy IT issues
across government

By: Brian Holak

By: Cliff Saran

-ADS BY GOOGLE

Latest TechTarget
resources

Cloud Computing
[

Top 6 soft skills in IT that cloud teams need

20f34

P

+

Softskills play a bigger partin successiul cloud deployments than you might think.
Technical skill are obviously essential in .

MOBILE COMPUTING
Up Next

DATACENTER

6 reasons legacy systems a@mﬁ.msandzmef&%dwsgﬁ- cloud

SUSTAINABILITY AND ESG.

Staying with tried-and-lrue legacy systems carStaridieds for ndeeiifiodiirisawes chishgingwith Sheteapid pace of cloud adoption.

certificatioreprograms

he safest route. But as the world changes al EZisW oxpeRERVERISEARS URBBCEHLBRRIT leac

About Us

Contributors

Guides

Editorial Ethics Policy

Reprints

Opinions

Meet The Editors

Answers

Photo Stories

Contact Us

Definitions

Quizzes

Advertisers

E-Products

Tips

Partner with Us

Events

Tutorials

Media Kit

Fealures

Videos

Corporate Site
AllRights Reserved, Copyright 2007 - 2024, TechTarget
Privacy Policy
D0 Not Sel or Share My Persona Information

20f34

P

+

