In 2022, 50 farms in Ben & Jerry’s Northeast dairy supply chain participated in the Milk with Dignity Program. They employed over 200 farmworkers covered through the program. During 2022, participating farm owners and farmworkers made over 300 inquiries to MDSC, 25% of which related to workplace health and safety, 22% to wages and related issues, 12% to schedules and rest, and 18% to housing conditions. Additionally, since the program launched, over $4.4 million from Ben & Jerry’s has supported farms’ improvements to working and housing conditions, including $2.9 million in raises to meet minimum wages (which reached $12.55 per hour in Vermont in 2022) and $1.49 million in bonuses, paid vacation and sick time, housing improvements, new personal protective equipment, and other safety improvements. Farms have continued to make concrete progress toward full compliance with standards such as the rights to at least eight consecutive hours of per workday, one day of per week, and comprehensive occupational safety and health protections.

Excellent Life for Cows The care for dairy cows is critically important and we rely on independent third-party standards to advance animal care in our supply. In 2021 and 2022, we audited farms to both our Caring Dairy Standard and the Global Animal Partnership (GAP) Dairy care standard. The audits identifed specifc opportunities to improve care while also highlighting industry-level barriers that may impede broader adoption of higher-level certifcations. Our farm partners are interested in continuous improvements with approximately 20% becoming GAP certifed, a not insignifcant step above standard industry performance, after undergoing the rigorous audits. 

Regenerative and Circular Agriculture Our farm partners recognize the growing pressure to fnd viable solutions to the climate crisis and are thoughtful and engaged collaborators in trialing new on-farm management practices to track and increase carbon sequestration, biodiversity, and build soil health. In preparation for a deeper dive into low carbon dairy, we conducted individual farm greenhouse gas (GHG) footprints using the Cool Farm Tool. 2022 also marked the third, and last, year of Prove It Projects carried out by Ben & Jerry’s Caring Dairy Farmer Innovators. Prove It Projects were designed to provide farmers with insights and opportunities to test run practices in regenerative concepts in the real-life laboratory of their own farms. The practices farmers “proved” to have value are then adopted into their own farm management and shared with the broader Ben & Jerry’s community. In 2022, each of the 27 Farmer Innovators selected two on-farm research projects from a list of 11 previously identifed projects, implementing a total of 54 projects. Several practices farmers tested stood out as providing benefcial outcomes: 

Nitrogen inhibitors showed advantages in yield and reduced input needs. • Changes to grazing management could help increase on-farm forage and cut production costs. • Multi-species cover crops were more viable with diferent planting techniques. • Farmers are still addressing habitat biodiversity, in what is a multi-year endeavor. In all, the three years of Prove It Projects have provided farmers with valuable insights while also informing the next iteration of Ben & Jerry’s farmer innovation pilots in hopes to drive Low Carbon Dairy farming.