Money Management Tips: 55 Ways to Save Money
Recreation and Entertainment:
1. Instead of paying for a fitness club
membership fee, buy some weights or go to
the ARC.
2. Don’t smoke. Cigarettes are expensive and
the money adds up quickly. Also you’ll be
fined if you smoke near school facilities.
3. Wait until after half-time at sport events
and get in for free!
4. When eating out, look for coupons or
special deals- many restaurants offer them!
Also, order water. Drinks are highly
overpriced.
5. At the beginning of the semester, many
local businesses give out coupon books.
Grab one!
6. There are hundreds of free activities on
campus. Join clubs, attend student
concerts, or go to church-sponsored events
for cheap fun. There is usually food
involved, too!
7. Illinites, student activities, happen at the
Illini Union every Friday night for free.
8. Experience some more cultures while in
college and attend a show at Krannert.
Student tickets are $10 or less. It’s FREE
sometimes!
9. If you’re throwing a party, have your guests
pay a little money or bring things to offset
your cost.
10. Don’t purchase a book unless you think you
really want to keep it. You can check out
books for free at libraries.
11. Rent movies with a group of friends or go to
second-run theaters for $1 or $2 a ticket.
12. Bring your student ID when you go out for a
movie. Most theaters will give discount for
students.

Food and Basic Needs:
13. Be a savvy consumer. Before making a
major purchase, do some researches on the
product quality through Consumer Reports
magazine.
14. Sometimes the cheaper product works just
as well as the expensive one.
15. Ask for generic medications at the
pharmacy.
16. Ladies, ditch the salon and get your hair
done at a cosmetology school.
17. Buying in bulk is usually a good option, but
try to shop for items by the per unit price.
Often times, the biggest options is not the
best way to get the most of your money.
18. Scout out garage/yard sales for
housewares, furniture, and stuff to
decorate your college dorm or apartment.
At the beginning of each semester, the
YMCA has a dump and run where they sell
items collected from various dorms and
apartment on campus.
19. Make things for gifts- it’s cheaper and the
time you invest shows you care.
20. Take advantage of sales by buying holiday
and birthday gifts throughout the year.
21. Get a job at a place where you already
spend a lot of money, so you can get
employee discounts.
22. Use mail-in rebates or coupons for groceries
or health and beauty items.
23. Don’t buy bottled water. Buy a water
filtration pitcher.
24. Don’t buy something just because it is one
sale. Consider it’s a need for you before
buying.
25. If you shop at a favorite store, apply for
their discount card if they have one.

Modified by Joe Pleshar, Yuanhang Fan, and Maggie Benson, Peer Educators of Spring 2015.
University of Illinois Extension Financial Wellness for College Students Program.
Source: National Student Loan Program’s Budget Handout #6: “Money Management
Options: 75 Ways to Save Money”, 2002.

Money Management Tips: 55 Ways to Save Money
26. Make home cooked meals. A home cooked
stead dinner is often cheaper than a fast
food binge. Eating at home will save you a
lot of money!
27. Pack a lunch instead of eating out.

Clothing:
28. Buy clothes at the end of the season when
they’re on sales.
29. If you don’t wear certain clothes anymore,
take them to a consignment shop or sell
them online. You can get part of the profit
and free up room in your closet.
30. Share dresses and tuxes with friends for
special occasions.
31. If you buy more than one of something, like
2 or 3 shirts, always ask for a discount.
32. Invest in durable clothes, shoes, etc. rather
than buying many cheap pairs.

Budgeting/ Spending Plan:
33. Set goals for your spending and saving.
34. Keep track of your spending to avoid
overspent. There are apps for that!
35. Don’t use a credit card if it will lead you to
make more purchases! On average, people
have credit cards spend 34% more.
36. Before going out to spend, set a limit for
yourself and stick to it!
37. Wait at least two hours before making a big
purchase to be sure it’s something you
really need.

Transportation:
38. Obey traffic laws. Speeding tickets will cost
more than just the ticket. It will raise your
insurance premiums.
39. Keep your tires inflated properly- you’ll get
better gas mileage.

40. Get good grades. Insurance companies offer
low rates to student with 3.0+ GPA.
41. Carpool with friend!
42. Search for dependable cards that offer good
gas mileage.
43. Drive an older car- the insurance payments
and taxes will be less.
44. Walk, bike, or ride to school- it’s good for
you to saves on gas.
45. Look around for cheapest gas price before
filling up. There are apps for that!

Savings:
46. Only use ATM’s of your bank. Other bank’s
ATM fees add up!
47. Always put part of our paycheck into a
savings account.
48. Spare change adds up! Get a piggy bank or
change jar and don’t underestimate the
value of your spare changes.
49. Volunteer! If you’re busy, you can’t spend
month and it’s a resume booster, too! It’s
always make you feel good to help and give
back to the community.
50. Use plastic grocery bags for trash can liners.

Conserving Resources:
51. Turn off the water while brushing your
teeth.
52. Unplug electronics when you aren’t using
them. Even while turned off, they still use
up costly energy.
53. Use items like shampoo, toothpaste, and
paper towels sparingly- enough to do the
job without waste.
54. Pay your bills online. Save paper and money
on stamps.
55. Ask your landlord to seal gaps between
door and windows to prevent heat leaks
over the winter.

Modified by Joe Pleshar, Yuanhang Fan, and Maggie Benson, Peer Educators of Spring 2015.
University of Illinois Extension Financial Wellness for College Students Program.
Source: National Student Loan Program’s Budget Handout #6: “Money Management
Options: 75 Ways to Save Money”, 2002.

