On August 5, 2024, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia held that Google unlawfully
monopolizes the markets for general search services and general search text ads through a series of
exclusive contracts with browser developers, mobile device manufacturers, and wireless carriers. The
opinion emerges from a lawsuit filed by the Department of Justice (DOJ) and a group of state attorneys
general (AGs) in 2020. The DOJ lawsuit was later consolidated with a separate case filed by another
group of state AGs that largely adopted the allegations in the DOJ’s complaint. This Legal Sidebar
provides an overview of the court’s decision and issues that may arise during the remedies phase of the
case.
The Challenged Agreements
The DOJ’s lawsuit targets distribution contracts that allegedly allow Google to foreclose (i.e., deny access
to) significant shares of the markets for general search and general search text ads. Some of the contracts
involve browser developers like Apple (the developer of the Safari browser) and Mozilla (the developer
of the Firefox browser). Under these agreements, Google pays developers a share of its search ads
revenue in exchange for the developers preloading Google as the default search engine for their browsers.
Other contracts involve manufacturers of Android mobile devices, such as Motorola and Samsung. These
agreements allow manufacturers to preinstall certain proprietary Google apps, like the Google Play Store,
on their devices. In exchange for that access, manufacturers must also preload other Google apps,
including Google Search and the Chrome browser, which defaults to Google Search.
Other agreements involve revenue-sharing arrangements with device manufacturers and wireless carriers.
Under these contracts, Google pays manufacturers and carriers a share of its revenue from search ads in
exchange for the preinstallation of Google Search at certain access points. Some of these agreements also
prohibit Google’s counterparties from preinstalling or promoting alternative general search engines.

The Court’s Decision
The DOJ’s lawsuit contends that Google’s distribution agreements constitute unlawful monopolization
under Section 2 of the Sherman Act because they foreclose substantial shares of the relevant markets and
deprive rivals of the scale needed to improve their search engines. The monopolization offense has two
elements: (1) the possession of monopoly power, and (2) exclusionary conduct. The following subsections
discuss the district court’s analysis of both elements.
Monopoly Power
The Supreme Court has characterized “monopoly power” as “the power to control prices or exclude
competition.” More specifically, monopoly power involves a substantial degree of market power—the
ability to raise prices above costs without sacrificing profits. Plaintiffs can establish monopoly power via
direct proof that a firm has in fact profitably raised prices substantially above competitive levels or
indirect structural evidence that supports an inference of monopoly power. Under the more common
indirect approach, plaintiffs can prove monopoly power by showing that the defendant possesses a
dominant market share that is protected by entry barriers.
To calculate market shares, plaintiffs must define a relevant market in which competition occurs. The
scope of the relevant market is determined by the range of reasonable substitutes for the good or service
in question. In evaluating substitutability, courts rely on both quantitative evidence and a series of
qualitative factors from Brown Shoe Co. v. United States, a 1962 Supreme Court decision. Because of its
centrality in establishing market power and monopoly power, market definition is often a dispositive issue
in antitrust cases.
Applying this legal framework, the district court concluded that Google has monopoly power in two
markets: general search services and general search text ads. The court relied on several of the Brown
Shoe factors in defining these markets, rejecting Google’s arguments that the relevant markets are
broader. Instead of a market for general search, Google had posited a larger market for “query responses”
that included vertical search engines (e.g., Expedia, Yelp), social media platforms, and other websites.
The court declined to adopt Google’s proposed market, reasoning that vertical search engines do not
respond to the range of queries answered by general search engines, even if they can serve as substitutes
for discrete purposes. The court concluded that Google has monopoly power in the narrower market for
general search based on the firm’s market share of over 89% and significant entry barriers like high
capital costs, Google’s control of key distribution channels, brand recognition, and scale.
In analyzing the scope of the relevant advertiser-side market, the court recognized markets for both search
advertising and general search text ads, rejecting Google’s argument for a broader digital advertising
market. Among other things, the court reasoned that search ads (which are displayed in response to
specific queries) are not reasonably interchangeable with other types of digital ads because search ads
allow advertisers to target customers with greater precision. The court ultimately determined that Google
lacks monopoly power in the market for search advertising—which includes search ads on vertical search
engines and social media platforms—because of an absence of entry barriers. However, the court found
that Google is a monopolist in the narrower market for general search text ads based on the firm’s
dominant market share and the entry barriers discussed above. 

The district court’s decision finds that Google is liable for violating the Sherman Act, but does not impose
remedies for those violations. Earlier in the litigation, the court granted the parties’ joint request to
bifurcate the liability and remedies phases of the case. The court has ordered the parties to propose a
schedule for remedies proceedings by September 4, 2024. Google has said that it plans to appeal the
court’s liability decision, but it is unclear whether the appeal will proceed before or after the district court
imposes remedies. 
Congressional Research Service 5
During the remedies phase, the district court will have several options. The narrowest would involve an
injunction prohibiting Google’s exclusive contracts. An injunction barring exclusivity was the remedy in
United States v. Dentsply, a monopolization case involving exclusive dealing that was resolved in 2006.
The most cited antitrust treatise also suggests that, in cases involving a single category of anticompetitive
conduct like exclusive dealing, a targeted injunction may be the most appropriate remedy. This type of
relief could allow distributors to negotiate default arrangements with other search engines, retain Google
as their defaults without receiving payments conditioned on exclusivity, or offer consumers a “choice
screen” directing them to select their own default search engine. The court may also consider ordering
Google to adopt a choice screen on Android devices, but it likely lacks the authority to require the
relevant browser developers to do so because they are not parties to the litigation.
Another possibility is a broader injunction requiring Google to share search data with rivals. This type of
mandatory pooling could facilitate the emergence of rival search engines, but might also create free-rider
problems that disincentivize investments in improving search quality. Such an arrangement might also
prove difficult for the court to administer.
