Section 161. Expansion of Family Caregiver Program of the VA
Eligibility
This section amends 38 U.S.C. §1720G(a)(2) to expand eligibility for the Comprehensive
Caregiver Program to pre-9/11 veterans, beginning on the date when the Secretary submits to
Congress the certification that the VA has fully implemented the IT system (described in Section
162), herein referred to as the certification date. Beginning on the certification date, the
Comprehensive Caregiver Program is extended over a two-year period to pre-9/11 veterans who
have a serious injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty in the active military, naval, or air
service on or before May 7, 1975. Two years after the certification date, the Comprehensive Care
Program is extended to all pre-9/11 veterans, covering veterans of all eras. It requires the
Secretary, no later than 30 days after the date the Secretary submits to Congress the above
certification, to publish the certification date in the Federal Register.
It also amends 38 U.S.C. §1720G(a)(2) to expand the eligibility criteria for the Comprehensive
Caregiver Program to include those veterans in need of personal care services because of a need
for regular or extensive instruction or supervision, without which the ability of the veteran to
function in daily life would be seriously impaired, among other existing criteria.
Caregiver Assistance
This section amends 38 U.S.C. §1720G(a)(3) to expand the types of assistance available to family
caregivers under the Comprehensive Care Program to include financial planning services and
legal services relating to the needs of injured veterans and their caregivers. It further amends this
subsection regarding the monthly stipend determination to specify that in determining the amount
and degree of personal care services provided to an eligible veteran whose need is based on a
need for supervision or protection, as specified, or regular instruction or supervision, as specified,
the determination must take into account (1) the assessment by the family caregiver; (2) the
extent to which the veteran can function safely and independently without supervision, protection,
or instruction; and (3) the amount of time required for the family caregiver to provide
supervision, protection, or instruction.
It also adds new language under 38 U.S.C. §1720G(a)(3) that in providing instruction,
preparation, and training to each approved family caregiver, the Secretary is required to
VA MISSION Act of 2018 (P.L.115-182)
Congressional Research Service R45390 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED 30
periodically evaluate the needs of the eligible veteran and the skills of the family caregiver to
determine if additional support is necessary. It amends 38 U.S.C. §1720(a)(5) to require the
Secretary to evaluate each application submitted jointly by an eligible veteran in collaboration
with the primary care team for the eligible veteran to the maximum extent practicable.
It further adds a new paragraph under 38 U.S.C. §1720(a) that in providing assistance to family
caregivers of eligible veterans, the Secretary may enter into contracts or agreements with
specified entities to provide family caregivers such assistance. The Secretary is required to
provide such assistance only if it is reasonably accessible to the family caregiver and is
substantially equivalent or better in quality to similar services provided by the VA. It authorizes
the Secretary to provide fair compensation to federal agencies, states, and other entities that
provide such assistance.
It amends the definition of personal care services under 38 U.S.C. §1720(d)(4) to include services
that provide the veteran with (1) supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of
neurological or other impairment or injury, and (2) regular or extensive instruction or supervision
without which the ability of the veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.
Section 162. Implementation of Information Technology System of the VA to
Assess and Improve the Family Caregiver Program
This section requires the Secretary to implement an IT system, no later than October 1, 2018,
with certain specified elements that fully supports the Comprehensive Caregiver Program and
allows for data assessment and program monitoring. No later than 180 days after implementing
the IT system, the Secretary is required, through the Under Secretary for Health, to conduct an
assessment of how key aspects of the Comprehensive Caregiver Program are structured and
carried out using data from the IT system and any other relevant data. The Secretary is required to
use the IT system to monitor and assess program workload, and to implement certain
modifications necessary to ensure program functioning and timeliness of services.
It also requires the Secretary, no later than 90 days after enactment, to submit an initial report to
the SVAC, HVAC, and GAO on the status of the planning, development, and deployment of the
IT system. The initial report must include an assessment of the needs of family caregivers of
veterans eligible for the Comprehensive Program solely due to a serious injury incurred or
aggravated in the line of duty in the active military, naval, or air service before September 11,
2001; the resource needs for including such family caregivers; and any changes necessary to
ensure successful program expansion. The GAO is required to review the initial report and notify
SVAC and HVAC with respect to the progress of the Secretary in fully implementing the required
IT system, as well implementation of a process to monitor, assess, and modify the program as
necessary. No later than October 1, 2019, the Secretary is required to submit a final report to
SVAC, HVAC, and the GAO on system implementation, including program monitoring,
assessment, and modification, as specified.