Behavioral Health During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
Data from multiple sources suggest that mental health symptoms and substance use have increased since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. These symptoms include emotional distress and anxiety, depression, and trauma-related conditions. Substance use refers to the number of individuals using substances such as alcohol or illicit drugs, and the frequency and quantities of use. 
Typically, comprehensive national morbidity and mortality data on mental health conditions, substance use, associated hospitalizations, and substance-related overdose deaths take months to compile and report. Comprehensive national data for 2020 are not yet available. Several organizations, including multiple federal agencies, have used short surveys and rapid data reporting to monitor mental health symptoms and substance use during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Although the methodological differences between these surveys and perennial surveys make comparisons between years imperfect, most of the 2020 data suggest an increase in behavioral health morbidity in the United States over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic.  
Mental Health  
Data collected from multiple surveys during the COVID-19 pandemic suggest that Americans experienced increased stress and symptoms of mental health conditions. In a survey conducted in April 2020, the State Health Access Data Assistance Center (SHADAC)—a program of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation—found that over 90% of U.S. adults reported experiencing additional levels of stress caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In this context, stress refers to psychological stress, which occurs when individuals believe that the consequences of a situation outweigh their ability to adequately cope with it. Reactions to stressors may include fear and concern about the future, tension and irritability, sadness or depression, or feeling powerless or overwhelmed, among others.
Without adequate coping strategies, stress can have detrimental effects on mental health. Coping strategies include any behavioral, social, or cognitive techniques used to mitigate the effects of stress. Coping strategies can be adaptive, meaning they promote better overall functioning (e.g., social connections, physical activities, hobbies, good sleep hygiene), or they can be maladaptive, meaning they are more likely to result in worse overall functioning (e.g., substance use, excessive screen time, risky behaviors). Although maladaptive coping strategies may reduce stress in the moment, they may exacerbate problems in the long term.  
Many individuals experiencing stress may have adequate coping strategies, meaning that stress is present but does not impair their daily functioning. For others, stress—and in particular stress caused by the pandemic—may have detrimental effects on their mental health. A nationally representative survey conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) throughout the pandemic found that an increasing number of Americans reported that pandemic-related stress was affecting their mental health. In March 2020, 32% of respondents felt that worry or stress related to coronavirus had a negative impact on their mental health. In April 2020 that number rose to 45%, and in July 2020, 53% reported that pandemic-related stress was affecting their mental health.  
Mental Health Disorders 
In some cases, extreme or prolonged stress can lead to mental health disorders. According to data collected by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), the percentage of Americans experiencing symptoms of a mental health disorder appears to have increased during the COVID19 pandemic. NCHS—a research agency under the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)—partnered with the U.S. Census Bureau on the Household Pulse Survey to monitor the social and economic effects of the pandemic on American households. The nationally representative survey collected data on employment status, food security, housing, physical and mental health, access to health care (including mental health care), and education disruption during the coronavirus pandemic. NCHS survey questions were designed to obtain information on the frequency of anxiety and depression symptoms. 
Other indicators of psychological distress appear elevated during the first phases of the pandemic. For example, CDC analysis of national emergency department (ED) visits showed that socioeconomic and psychosocial-related visits increased during April 2020 (compared with April 2019), while total ED visits decreased over 40%. Socioeconomic or psychosocial factors were one of a few categories of ED visits that increased; most of the 200 common diagnostic causes of ED visits decreased during that same time. Other research suggests that ED visits for mental health conditions may have decreased during the first few months of the pandemic, to a lesser extent than overall ED visits. 
Suicide 
Some evidence suggests that suicidal thoughts may have increased during the pandemic. One CDC analysis found that during the pandemic approximately twice as many U.S. adults reported serious consideration of suicide in the previous 30 days compared with 2018 (10.7% versus4.3%). Although the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline did not report increases in call volume, the Disaster Distress Helpline (part of the Suicide Lifeline) experienced a 335% increase in calls during the first five months of the pandemic.  
The effects of the pandemic on suicide attempts and suicide deaths is unclear, though it appears that suicide mortality has decreased compared with previous years. An increase in suicidal thoughts does not necessarily equate to an increase in suicide attempts or suicide deaths.
Research from CDC shows a decrease in emergency department (ED) visits for suicide attempts between March and October 2020 compared with the same period in 2019, but to a lesser extent than overall ED visits. Preliminary national suicide mortality data in the United States for 2020 show that suicide deaths in the United States may have decreased in 2020 compared with the three previous years. In addition, regional differences may account for changes in suicide mortality. For example, some individual states and municipalities have reported stable rates in suicide deaths during the pandemic, whereas others have reported decreased rates. There may be demographic differences in suicide rates during the pandemic also. For example, CDC reported that in May 2020 ED visits for suspected suicide attempts began to increase among adolescents, especially girls. Researchers in Maryland found that suicide mortality rates increased for Black residents from March 2020 to May 2020, while decreasing for White residents over that same time.
Substance Use-Related Overdoses 
Comprehensive national data on drug-related overdoses and overdose deaths during the pandemic are not yet available. Preliminary data from the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) suggest increases in drug-related overdoses during the first few months of the pandemic. The Overdose Detection Mapping Application Program (ODMAP), an ONDCP surveillance system 
that tracks suspected overdose data nationally in near real-time, reported an increase of 11% in fatal overdoses and a 19% increase in nonfatal overdoses from March through May 2020 compared with the same months in 2019. Nearly 62% of participating counties reported increases from March to May 2020. Other areas have reported stable rates of overdose deaths. 
Notably, ODMAP overdose submissions appeared to be trending upward prior to the onset of the pandemic, making it difficult to determine the effects of the pandemic and mitigation measures using these data.
CDC also noted an increase in drug-related overdose deaths in the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. Similar to the ODMAP data, the CDC data showed that overdose deaths were already increasing in the months preceding the pandemic. However, CDC data showed the rate of overdose deaths accelerating after the pandemic began. In an analysis of provisional CDC mortality data, the National Institute for Health Care Management found that the rise is particularly notable for deaths involving synthetic opioids. In addition, the institute reported increases in deaths involving commonly prescribed opioids and heroin—both of which had been declining in recent years.
 When examining emergency department (ED) visits, CDC found a higher number of drug overdoses—including opioid overdoses—between March and October 2020 compared with the same period in 2019. Put together, the ODMAP and CDC data suggest that drug-related overdoses and overdose deaths have increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. Individuals with substance use disorders may be at higher risk of contracting SARS-CoV-2 due to unstable housing situations, high incarceration rates, or the inability to physically distance themselves. In addition, those with substance use disorders may be at higher risk for complications of COVID-19 because substance use can often suppress the immune system or inhibit respiratory functioning.