Congress passed and the President signed into law the National Quantum Initiative Act (NQI Act; P.L. 115-368; codified at 15 U.S.C. §§8801 et seq.) in December 2018 to accelerate quantum research and development (R&D) for the economic and national security of the United States and ensure the continued U.S. leadership in quantum information science and its technology applications. Since the enactment of the NQI Act, researchers have made progress in quantum R&D. The authorization of funding for several federal R&D activities under the NQI Act is set to expire at the end of FY2023. 
In the NQI Act, Congress defined the term quantum information science as “the use of the laws of quantum physics for the storage, transmission, manipulation, computing, or measurement of information.” Quantum computing, one of technology applications of quantum information science, uses a quantum bit, or qubit, as its basic data unit, to harness quantum properties such as superposition and entanglement. By generating and manipulating qubits, a quantum computer is capable of performing certain calculations significantly faster than conventional, non-quantum computers, known as classical computers, leading to new ways to solve some complex problems that were previously unsolvable. Researchers have demonstrated the potential for quantum computing applications in areas such as cryptography, machine learning, and scientific and engineering research, particularly using modeling, optimization, and simulation. The NQI Act is the primary federal law that supports R&D activities in quantum computing. It has been amended by the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for FY2022 (P.L. 117-81) and the CHIPS and Science Act (Division B of P.L. 117-167). The current act contains four titles, directing (1) the President to implement an NQI Program with a 10-year plan to accelerate quantum R&D, invest in and coordinate fundamental federal R&D activities, and partner with industry and universities to advance goals and priorities in the NQI Program; (2) the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to carry out specified R&D activities and convene a stakeholder consortium to identify the future measurement, standards, cybersecurity, and needs for a robust quantum industry; (3) the National Science Foundation (NSF) to carry out a basic research and education program and award grants to establish Multidisciplinary Centers for Quantum Research and Education; and (4) the Department of Energy (DOE) to administer a number of programs, including a basic research program, National Quantum Information Science Research Centers, a program to accelerate innovation in quantum network infrastructure, and the Quantum User Expansion for Science and Technology program. The authorization of funding for the following activities under the NQI Act is set to expire in September 2023: NSF’s five university-based Quantum Leap Challenge Institutes, DOE’s five national lab-led research centers, and NIST’s R&D activities, including the industry-led Quantum Economic Development Consortium. 
Since the enactment of the NQI Act in 2018, researchers have made notable advances in quantum computing in three areas: demonstrating that a quantum processor could execute a complex computational task much faster than a classical supercomputer in an experiment; demonstrating the mitigation of calculation errors caused by the loss of information held by qubits—a major outstanding challenge to quantum computing—in an experiment; and scaling up quantum computing processors, thus enhancing their power and potential reliability. Some experts argue that sustained federal R&D investment is necessary to accelerate progress toward practical quantum computing and to maintain the leading role of U.S. researchers and institutions globally. There is less consensus, however, on the specific role the federal government should play in quantum R&D and how resources and support should be specifically targeted and prioritized. Congress faces policymaking in three areas. First, Congress may decide whether and how to reauthorize or expand federal R&D activities and support under the NQI Act. Second, Congress may choose whether to set policy priorities to ensure U.S. leadership in quantum computing, including (1) accelerating the development of practical quantum computers with near-term, useful applications; (2) supporting the development of an accessible, sustainable, and secure supply chain and domestic manufacturing capabilities; and (3) facilitating the development of a quantum-literate workforce. Congress may also consider whether to set policy priorities to protect national security interests in quantum computing by addressing risks; in particular, the anticipated compromise of current cryptographic systems that protect sensitive data and communications among government agencies, financial institutions, health service providers, and others.