Fast fashion has revolutionized the fashion industry at a cost to the environment and
human rights. The fast fashion business model relies on the exploitation of resources
and human labor to deliver garments following the latest trends to its consumers at
an unprecedented rate. This quick output of garments demands a sizeable volume of
raw materials fed into the fast fashion industry, creating a significant amount of waste,
pollution and degradation to air, water and wildlife habitat. The pollution introduced
by the fast fashion industry results in devastating impacts to both terrestrial and
aquatic environments, with harmful effects linked to habitat degradation, proliferation
of chemicals and microplastics in waterways, and the increasing impact of climate
change from anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions.
Despite the increased demand and consumption of fast fashion garments and
people’s apparent growing interest in fashion, they are buying more while wearing
fewer of the items they own. The poor quality of fast fashion clothing contributes to
the limited lifespans of garments, which often end up decomposing slowly in landfills
or being incinerated. In addition to degrading in landfills or being incinerated, fast
fashion clothing has also become a notorious source of microplastics in marine
environments as the cheap, plastic-based materials shed fibers that make their way to
the oceans.
On top of the environmental exploitation that allows for fast fashion’s cheap prices,
the other contributing factor is worker exploitation in low-income countries where
factories are based. Workers — primarily young women — are subjected to hazardous
working conditions while earning unlivable wages, despite the companies pulling in
massive profits.
Although both the fashion industry and consumers have indicated that sustainability
is a priority, fast fashion is an increasingly unsustainable market that continues to
grow, relatively unchecked. And the scale of this industry is enormous: For a company
such as Shein, an estimated 1,000 new styles are uploaded daily — though there has
been speculation that this figure may be a gross underestimate (Zhou, 2022). With the
average number of each garment manufactured ranging from 50-100, according to
the Shein website, this results in a minimum of 50,000 new garments created every
day.
Changing these practices requires drawing attention to the harms of fast fashion and
shifting the narrative from the glamour that has been assigned to overconsumption
toward fashion that embraces sustainability and justice.
AT WHAT COST? 4
Behind the glamour of the fashion industry hides a steep environmental price. The
fashion industry as a whole is responsible for consuming 79 trillion liters of water per
year, producing over 92 million tons of solid waste per year, and contributing up to an
estimated 20% of global wastewater and 10% of CO2 emissions (Niinimaki et al., 2020;
UN Climate Change, 2018).
This output of CO2 exceeds that of the international aviation and shipping industries
combined (UN Climate Change, 2018). Concern continues to rise as, over a span of
roughly 20 years, the number of new garments made per year has nearly doubled and
global consumption of fashion has increased by 400% (World Bank, 2019; Collective
Fashion Justice). If this trend continues, industry greenhouse gas emissions could also
increase significantly, possibly by over 50% by the year 2030 (World Bank, 2019). One of
the most notorious sectors driving these harms has also become one of the fastest
growing: the fast fashion industry.
Fast fashion is an exploitative, growing industry based on the replication and mass
production of garments following current trends — a business model that has
revolutionized the industry, simplifying consumers’ purchasing process and
expediting the turnover of both garments and trends.
This transformation, however, comes at a price. Every day fast fashion companies are
capable of producing a shocking 10,000 new garment styles (Williams, 2022). These
items are produced quickly and with an excess of waste: As much as 15% of the fabric
used during manufacturing is discarded during the garment production process
(Shukla, 2022). Unethical generation of waste has become a pivotal element of
transforming the fashion industry into the polluting behemoth it is today.
In addition to the waste produced during quick manufacturing, businesses are
generating yet more pollution to protect their business models (Lieber, 2018). Brands
at all levels, from Shein to Nike to Burberry, have been found to destroy new,
undamaged products (Mayo, 2021). This has often been carried out by burning, which
introduces additional CO2 and toxic gases on top of the industry’s already large
contribution. For companies like Shein, production costs are so low that returned
items are often destined for landfills because it costs less to simply dispose of items
than put them back into circulation (Williams, 2022).
The low costs set by the fast fashion industry have been praised by some for making
new clothing more accessible to people with lower incomes, yet the largest
consumers of fast fashion include customers of relatively substantial income, while
low-income communities bear the brunt of the industry’s waste and pollution. This
further demonstrates that the goal of this industry is not inclusivity but enormous
AT WHAT COST? 5
INTRODUCTION
profit based on environmental and worker exploitation (Williams, 2022). Fast fashion
has changed society’s perception of what clothing is worth. The enticing low costs in
fast fashion push poorly made garments on people, promoting excess purchasing of
cheap items destined for the landfill rather than the purchasing of higher-quality
garments that will ultimately last longer

Clothing production adversely affects the environment at every stage. Land is cleared
or degraded to produce fossil fuels for fibers, raise animals, or grow commodity crops.
Toxic chemicals are used in processing. Greenhouse gas emissions are produced in
manufacturing and transportation, and waste is generated by factories.
Polyester, a synthetic material obtained from oil, is one of the most widely used fabrics
in the fast fashion industry. It is also one of the most environmentally harmful fabrics.
This material alone was reported to consume 70 million barrels of oil in 2015; the
production of all synthetic fibers uses approximately 342 million barrels of oil each
year (Conca, 2015; Ellen Macarthur Foundation and Circular Fibres Initiative, 2017).
Petrochemicals, in fact, were estimated to be responsible for 62% of global textile
fibers (Textile Exchange, 2021). The extraction of fossil fuels requires destroying
wildlands to develop facilities and drilling sites, affecting the habitability of land and
causing habitat fragmentation, which disrupts essential animal behaviors (The
Wilderness Society, 2021). Producing synthetics also contributes greenhouse gases to
the atmosphere due to their origin in petrochemicals.
Fossil-fuel-based fabrics, however, are not the only materials of concern in the fast
fashion industry. Producing animal-based textiles such as wool involves the breeding
of farmed animals, which often results in widespread habitat loss from deforestation
and grassland conversion to create the necessary room for grazing or to produce feed
(McKinsey & Company 2020). Animal-based fibers used in fast fashion are also
responsible for a large portion of the industry’s massive water consumption. Sheep
bred for wool require significant amounts of water for hydration and feed crops that
frequently rely on additional, chemical-intensive processes (Center for Biological
Diversity, 2021).
The wool industry degrades wildlife habitat, with sheep displacing native wildlife and
eating the vegetation they need. It also produces large amounts of wastewater,
with fecal waste polluting waterways and slaughterhouses expelling additional
AT WHAT COST? 6
wastewater. This water often contains contaminants including pathogens, proteins,
fibers, and contamination from antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals (Center for
Biological Diversity, 2021).
Since 35% to 60% of the weight of shorn wool is contaminated with grease, dirt, feces,
vegetable matter and other impurities, wool must go through a scouring process
using hot water and chemicals before it can be turned into a usable fiber. A typical
wool scour creates an effluent load similar to the sewage from a town of 30,000
people (Center for Biological Diversity, 2021). A more detailed accounting of the full
scope of environmental harms of animal-based textiles such as wool can be found in
Shear Destruction: Wool, Fashion and the Biodiversity Crisis (Center for Biological
Diversity).
Cotton is one of the most widely used materials worldwide due to its versatility and
easy care. But despite only occupying 2.4% of the world’s cropland, cotton uses
tremendous amounts of pesticides; it is responsible for roughly one-fifth of global
insecticide use (McKinsey & Company 2020). This results in serious harm to nontarget
insects such as endangered rusty patched bumble bees and monarch butterflies. On
top of its enormous pesticide use, conventional cotton, which accounts for most
cotton grown, requires a significant amount of water during the growing process. The
cotton used in a single pair of denim jeans requires roughly 10,000 liters of water, an
amount equal to what the average person would drink over the course of ten years
(UN Climate Change, 2018). And the water that runs off cotton fields carries a heavy
pesticide load.
Unlike conventional cotton, organic cotton is not produced with synthetic pesticides.
It’s also estimated that organic cotton production uses 91% less water than
conventional cotton, in large part because genetically engineered crops generally
require more water (Chan, 2019). Organic cotton, however, is seldom used over
conventional cotton in fast fashion due to the heightened costs associated with
production.
Even fibers associated with fewer environmental harms than those reliant on oil
production and animal agriculture can cause severe damage when produced
irresponsibly and at scale to meet the demands of fast fashion. More than 150 million
trees are cut down annually to produce man-made cellulose fibers (Canopy, 2020). Of
the man-made cellulose fibers produced, up to an estimated 30% originate from
primary or endangered forests (McCullough, 2014). Additional habitat loss can result
from the soil degradation or pollution of waterways from chemicals used in
processing or at plantations (McKinsey & Company 2020).
Fast fashion also requires a significant amount of water at the factory level, which
results in roughly 93 billion cubic meters of wastewater just from textile dyeing (Lai,
2021). In low-income countries that produce a large portion of the world’s fast
fashion, such as Bangladesh, the toxic wastewater from textile factories has
historically been dumped directly into rivers or streams to reduce production costs
(Regan, 2020). This action has resulted in bodies of water changing colors from the
AT WHAT COST? 7
dye used or turning black and thick with sludge (Regan, 2020).
This polluted water introduces harms to both marine environments and humans. At
least 72 of the chemicals used in the dyeing process have been identified as toxic
(World Bank, 2014). Once these chemicals accumulate in waterways, they begin to
produce a film on the surface, blocking the entrance of light and preventing
organisms’ abilities to photosynthesize (World Bank, 2014). Reduced ability to
photosynthesize results in lower oxygen levels, or hypoxia, in the water, impacting the
ecosystem’s survivability for aquatic plants and animals. In addition to increased
prevalence of hypoxia in aquatic environments, the presence of certain chemicals
used in the dyeing process can also increase the buildup of heavy metals (World Bank,
2014).
Polluted water is often used to irrigate crops and studies have found textile dyes
present in fruits and vegetables grown around Savar in Bangladesh (Sakamoto et al.,
2019). Areas closer to industrial hubs are disproportionately impacted by the harms of
fast fashion, with costs to livelihoods due to impacted agriculture or fishing, increased
incidence of disease including jaundice or diarrhea, and decreased accessibility to safe
drinking water during the dry season, as contaminated surface water may be unable
to be effectively treated (World Bank, 2014; Ullah et al., 2006).
Pesticides used in the growing of cotton and other crops have also been found to
have harmful effects on biodiversity. The textile industry is estimated to account for
between 10-20% of global pesticide use (McKinsey & Company, 2021).
Organisms can be exposed to chemicals either directly through application or
indirectly through runoff, contamination, or secondary poisoning (Beyond Pesticides).
Exposure to pesticides is linked to a wide array of health concerns in various species
including birds, small mammals, insects, fish and humans. These health concerns
consist of reproductive effects, neurotoxicity, endocrine effects and liver and kidney
damage (Beyond Pesticides). Such harmful effects can occur after minimal exposure,
as reproductive abnormalities have been observed in multiple species following “safe”
levels of exposure as classified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(Beyond Pesticides).
The environmental impacts of fast fashion are not limited to the direct impacts from
the manufacturing process. Fast fashion churns out poorly made clothes with limited
lifespans because of the low quality of materials used and the industry thriving off the
constant business from a quick turnover of garments. The quick turnover coupled
with poor quality resulted in 60% of the items manufactured in 2012 being discarded
only a few years after purchase (Shukla, 2022). One survey in Britain found that 1 in 3
young women believed clothes to be “old” following as few as one or two wears
(McKinsey & Company, 2018).
On average consumers are keeping purchased items about half as long as they did at
the turn of the 21st century and purchasing 60% more clothing per year (Remy et
al., 2016). Based on this trend and the low prevalence of clothing recycling, over 50%
AT WHAT COST? 8
AT WHAT COST? 9
of these garments end up in landfills (Shukla, 2022).
In 2018, 11.3 million tons of textiles entered landfills
as municipal solid waste in the United States,
averaging out to roughly 70 pounds of discarded
garments per person (EPA).
Even for the clothing that continues to be worn and
washed, an environmental toll is paid. Synthetic
fabrics release microfibers at alarming rates of
roughly 700,000 fibers per load of laundry, which
often end up in the ocean and other environments
(Ocean Clean Wash, 2019). This adds up to
approximately 500,000 tons of microfibers per year
entering the ocean (Ellen MacArthur Foundation,
2017). An IUCN report estimated that between
15%-31% of plastic pollution in the ocean could
come from household or industrial products
expelling these microplastics, with 35% of that
microplastic coming from the washing of synthetic
fabrics (Boucher and Friot, 2017).
Fibers such as polyester are slow to degrade in the ocean, taking potentially up to 200
years to decompose, then producing toxic substances when they do that pose
dangers for marine ecosystems (Brewer, 2019; Shukla, 2022). Microplastics pose the
additional danger of being consumed by marine organisms, then entering the food
chain and being consumed eventually by humans. For marine organisms that
consume microplastics, impacts may include delayed growth, abnormal behavior, or
reduced intake of food (Li et al., 2021). For humans, microplastics that have made their
way up the food chain pose risks of allergic reactions or cell death (Parker, 2022).
Despite the majority of fiber production being attributed to synthetic fabrics, a 2020
study found that most microfibers were actually from cellulosic and plant-based
fibers, followed by animal fibers (Suaria et al., 2020). While such natural fibers are often
assumed to be biodegradable, modifications made during textile production often
include alterations with chemicals, dyes, or coatings that in turn impact the
biodegradability of the material (Henry et al., 2019). Additional modifications that occur
during manufacturing are seen with wool, where natural fibers are often blended with
synthetics for fast fashion, impacting the biodegradability of the fabric (Center for
Biological Diversity, 2021).
As much of the research on the biodegradability and risks of microfibers is new or still
developing, the problem of microfiber introduction from the fast fashion industry
cannot yet be limited to the impacts from synthetics, as the full scope of risks of all
microfibers is still being realized. This brings the issue of fast fashion back to the
immense scale of production, as there is not one specific fiber to blame for the
environmental degradation but the business model as a whole.
Photo Source: Canva
AT WHAT COST? 10
The introduction of chemicals to the environment is not the only harm associated
with the fast fashion industry. The harsh chemicals used in manufacturing create
potential health hazards for workers and consumers. These risks can be felt in a wide
range of communities, as fast fashion garments are usually produced in low-income
countries but purchased in high-income countries.
At the beginning of the production process, pesticides can cause harm to workers as
they have been linked to acute and chronic health issues including reproductive
disorders, neurological disorders, respiratory conditions, certain cancers and death
(Farmworker Justice, 2013). In garment factories, workers are exposed to occupational
hazards including respiratory harms from chemicals and musculoskeletal harms from
repeated motions (Islam, 2022).
The harmful effects can even be experienced by the consumer of fast fashion.
Garments contain a variety of harmful chemicals including PFAS, azo dyes, phthalates,
and formaldehyde (Fashinnovation, 2022). These chemicals come with risks of
irritation; respiratory, developmental, and reproductive problems; and certain cancers.
On top of that, the spillover of cheaply made fast fashion can also affect the
economies of low-income countries, even if they are not involved directly in the
production of garments.
Every year the United States exports roughly 500,000 tons of secondhand clothing to
low- and middle-income countries that do not always possess the infrastructure to
handle it (Brooks, 2019). Reports from various African communities note how these
imports can decimate local textile businesses, as they are unable to compete with the
competitive costs of these used garments (Brooks, 2019). While this opens a new
market for secondhand clothing, it increases reliance on foreign countries and
suppresses local industries, resulting in a loss of culture and traditional styles (Porter,
2019).
The continuing desire around the world for these garments at low costs also
contributes to the ongoing injustice related to low wages and working conditions in
the low-income countries where most factories are based. In April 2013 the Rana Plaza
building in Dhaka, Bangladesh collapsed, resulting in more than 1,100 textile-worker
fatalities and bringing to light the subpar conditions in which fast fashion industries
operate. Between 2006 and 2012, more than 500 workers in Bangladesh garment
factories died in factory fires, usually due to faulty wiring (Thomas, 2018).
Following these tragic events, the Accord on Fire and Building Safety was signed by
various fast fashion companies, including American Eagle, H&M, and Inditex. This
agreement resulted in 97,000 hazards being repaired in 1,600 factories, and 900
factories being shut down for not meeting compliance standards (Thomas, 2018).
HARMS TO HUMANS
Following the expiration of the Accord in 2018, the 2018 Transition Accord was signed
to extend similar protections until 2021 (Clean Clothes Campaign). Most recently, the
International Accord took effect in September 2021 (International Accord, 2021). This
legally binding agreement promises to ensure factory structural safety for 26 months
by the brands that have signed, which can be found here.
Though a small step toward remedying the worker injustices in the fast fashion
industry, these pacts have yet to address low wages or health hazards associated with
this type of factory work. Beyond historical structure-related tragedies, textile workers
are exposed to various occupational hazards, including respiratory and
musculoskeletal harms (Islam, 2022). Reported health conditions that have been
documented include endocrine damage and reproductive harms, along with
accidental injuries and death (Sant’Ana and Kovalechen, 2012).
These effects are spread disproportionately across genders, as most workers in these
factories are young women (Thomas, 2018). An estimated 80% of global workers in the
garment industry are women, and despite this workplace majority, discrimination,
gender pay gaps, and sexual harassment continue to be reported (Baptist World Aid
Australia, 2019).
While many companies have — or are working to establish — systems to remedy this,
inequalities continue to exist in many of these garment manufacturing environments
(Baptist World Aid Australia, 2019). A reported 9 out of 10 garment workers in
Bangladesh are paid so unfairly for their labor that they cannot afford food for
themselves or their families (Oxfam). Yet to provide workers with a livable wage would
cost some companies as little as an estimated 1% of the retail price of garments
(Oxfam).
The gross injustices occurring within the fast fashion industry stand against the
narrative that fast fashion benefits low-income people. Rather, it exploits workers and
consumers alike.
AT WHAT COST? 11
Photo Source: Rio Lecatompessy - Unsplash
Despite the various claims made by companies showcasing their sustainable efforts
through partial recycling or “conscious” collections, overall efforts are still relatively
low. Even the actions of companies that are following through on their pledges to be
more sustainable are not necessarily having a significant positive impact.
One of the most common recycled materials to substitute the creation of new
synthetics are polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles. In a survey of roughly 50
fashion brands, 85% claimed that they were working toward using recycled polyester
sourced from plastic bottles (Circular). Using recycled polyester has the potential
impact of reducing carbon emissions by 32% (Federal Office for the Environment,
2017). But while recycling sounds green in theory, there are several logistical
drawbacks.
Recycling synthetic materials does not fix the emerging problem of microplastics, as
recycled materials will expel just as many fibers as new materials (Bryce, 2021).
Additionally, removing plastic bottles from their established, closed-loop system may
actually harm their overall recyclable potential. These bottles can be recycled at least
10 times in the current system. Feeding them into the fashion industry decreases
their likelihood and potential to be recycled as most garments end up in landfills
(Bryce, 2021). Despite the potential that exists with recycling plastic bottles, the
actual rate at which PET bottles are recycled remains relatively low, with only 29.1%
being recycled in 2018 (EPA). Textile recycling involves a similar shortcoming, as it’s
estimated that less than 1% of textile waste is recycled into new fibers due to
logistical issues including the collecting, sorting, and processing of garments
(McKinsey & Company, 2022).
Many claims made by fast fashion companies hint at sustainability but fall short, and
a lack of transparency contributes to the problem of greenwashing. Greenwashing is
infamous in the fast fashion industry, and multiple companies having had attention
drawn to their misleading claims in the past. Companies like Boohoo, SHEIN, H&M,
ASOS, and Zara have all released claims on their efforts to improve their
sustainability, but there’s little evidence they are realizing those claims (Rauturier,
2022; Igini, 2022).
The popular brand H&M released environmental scorecards informing consumers
about how environmentally friendly their garments were. In an investigation by
Quartz, more than half of the scorecards claimed pieces to be more
environmentally friendly than they actually were, and in some instances the
statements were described as being “the exact opposite of reality” (Quartz, 2022).
The garments included in the controversial claims were those labeled as
“Conscious Choice.” This specific label was described by H&M to mean “pieces
AT WHAT COST? 12
GREENWASHING

While many companies have environmentally harmful business models, there are
others that are taking a more meaningful approach to sustainability. These companies
are actively encouraging people to extend the life of their clothing, providing
customers with the resources to do so, and using data to back up their sustainability
claims. These claims have been published by the companies and their accuracies have
not been evaluated by this report.
Levi’s, for example, urges customers to wash their jeans less: after about 10 wears. This
not only lengthens the lifespan of jeans but saves water from washing machines and
reduces the expelling of microfibers in the wash. Data published on Levi’s website
states that taking care of your jeans and wearing them for 10 months or longer will
reduce their carbon footprint by 18% and water footprint by 23%.
Levi’s also offers solutions for old or damaged clothing, like opening Levi’s Tailor Shops
where clothes can be altered or repaired, offering tutorials on how to perform various
DIY projects on jeans, and suggesting that you donate unwanted clothing to
secondhand shops or pass items along as hand-me-downs.
Other ways that brands are trying to lessen the waste in fashion is through product
guarantees and resale initiatives. Patagonia includes a guarantee that if clothing
develops damage due to wear, the company will repair it at a “reasonable charge.”
Like Levi’s, Patagonia offers DIY repair guides to extend the life of products. It also
hosts Worn Wear, a site where you can trade in used clothing so it can be washed and
resold, lengthening the garment’s lifespan. As an incentive, trading in a garment will
get you credit that can be used to purchase new or used from the brand. Worn Wear
also has the additional bonus that the used articles are sold at a reduced cost
compared to new items. This increases accessibility of quality, long-lasting products to
individuals who might not be able to afford them otherwise and resort to fast fashion
for financial reasons.
A PUSH TOWARD SUSTAINABILITY
AT WHAT COST? 13
created with a little extra consideration for the planet,” with products containing at
least 50% of “more sustainable materials” (H&M). These vaguely defined “eco-friendly”
labels are another popular industry greenwashing technique. But simultaneously
producing and promoting the purchase of billions of garments per year, many of
which get discarded and replaced quickly, reduces the potential positive impacts of
so-called “conscious collections” and falsely reassures consumers.
A different approach can be seen with MUD Jeans, which in 2013 introduced a
program called Lease a Jeans, where customers can pay a monthly fee to lease jeans
for a year, after which the payments stop and the customer can either keep the jeans
or return them to be recycled. In 2021, 11,512 pairs of jeans were recycled, with a
donation to plant one tree with the nonprofit Justdiggit with every pair. By promoting
a circular economy through jeans recycling, MUD Jeans states, it’s producing no
additional end-of-life waste for those articles and using 92% less water than the
average jeans.
In addition to creative solutions to extend the lifespans of garments and reduce waste,
efforts are being made by some companies to use more sustainable materials and
manufacturing processes. For plant-based fibers like cotton, organic and recycled
materials tend to be more sustainable than conventional and virgin materials,
respectively.
To grow cotton — one of the most commonly used fabrics in the world — a substantial
amount of pesticides are conventionally used. Certified organic cotton, especially
grown in countries like the United States that have strict organic standards, does not
contain the dangerous pesticide load of conventional cotton. And recycled cotton
does not take any additional pesticides to produce, reduces water consumption, and
prevents garments from being sent to landfills.
Flax (linen) and hemp are two additional, versatile crops that can be used for textiles.
Both are relatively environmentally friendly alternatives as they require minimal water
and are often grown with little to no pesticides. Hemp grows so densely that it can
reduce competition, and it also naturally deters pests (Hymann, 2020). Linen uses less
water and fewer pesticides than conventional cotton and has the benefit that the
plant it’s derived from is typically used in its entirety, reducing overall waste during
production (Newman, 2020). Linen’s natural hues come in a variety of colors including
ivory, tan, and grays, reducing the amount of dyes necessary (Newman, 2020). When
untreated, linen is entirely biodegradable.
In a push for more sustainable options, new materials are being derived from various
types of plants. Bananatex is a relatively new fabric made from Abacá banana plants
that is fully biodegradable and circular. This plant has many environmental
advantages, including that it does not require the use of pesticides, fertilizers, or
additional water (Bananatex). These characteristics have helped to contribute to
reforestation in certain areas, strengthening biodiversity (Bananatex).
On top of using more sustainable fabrics, environmentally conscientious companies
are taking additional steps to reduce waste in their supply chains. Efforts include
using recycled, plastic-free, or compostable packaging, using less harmful chemicals,
and getting energy from cleaner sources such as solar power. While there is room for
additional reform in the fashion industry, a few examples of brands working towards
more sustainable practices can be seen here.
Necessary reform of the fast fashion industry must involve voices from all levels. This
AT WHAT COST? 14
includes individuals pushing for change, governments enacting policies that can
oversee change, and companies committing to make the change. Fast fashion
companies need to be held accountable for their destructive practices, including the
waste they produce and the worker injustice that their business models are built
around. Companies’ flimsy claims of future reform are no longer enough.
Policy efforts to improve the fashion industry have involved the health and safety of
garment workers, unfair wages, and transparency of environmental impacts. U.S.
policies of note include The Fashioning Accountability and Building Real Institutional
Change (FABRIC) Act, The Fashion and Sustainability and Social Accountability Act,
and the SWEAT Bill.
The FABRIC Act is a federal bill that was introduced in May 2022. This legislature would
protect nearly 100,000 American garment workers, improving working conditions and
wages, revitalizing the U.S. garment industry and investing in domestic apparel
production (The FABRIC Act).
The Fashion and Sustainability and Social Accountability Act was referred to the
Consumer Protection Committee in early 2022 and requires fashion manufacturers
and retail sellers to disclose environmental policies along with social due diligence
policies. This state bill would also establish a community benefit fund that would help
implement projects that directly benefit environmental justice communities (New
York Senate).
The SWEAT Bill passed assembly in March 2022. This state bill involves ensuring the
payment of wages for work that was already performed. It also “creates a lien remedy
for all employees; provides grounds for attachment; relates to procedures where
employees may hold shareholders of non-publicly traded corporations personally
liable for wage theft; relates to rights for victims of wage theft to hold the ten
members with the largest ownership interests in a company personally liable for wage
theft” (New York Senate).
If companies are required or incentivized to pursue more sustainable practices, the
scale of destruction caused by the fashion industry could be significantly lessened.
Additional work that could help to reform the fashion industry includes making
sustainable fashion more affordable, so people of limited means are not forced to buy
fast fashion, along with making fast fashion companies internalize the environmental
costs of their production and waste.
