1
Area of Interest: Business
Business - Accounting
Ontario College Diploma
2 Years
Program Code: 0214C01FWO
Ottawa Campus
Our Program
Get the essential skills to start a career in Accounting.
The Business - Accounting Ontario College Diploma program balances accounting theory with
tools used in the industry. This two-year program equips you with the essential skills for various
entry-level accounting positions.
Learn how to complete accounting tasks, from conducting bookkeeping responsibilities to
preparing financial statements and personal income tax returns. Expand your knowledge of various
business concepts including economics and finance.
Explore accounting concepts while sharpening your communication, math and technological skills.
Courses incorporate accounting software to strengthen your computer literacy and provide you
with up-to-date technical skills, which are essential in this field.
In the program`s final semester, you have the opportunity to apply for a work placement to
practise your skills in a real work setting. See Additional Information for eligibility requirements.
Students considering a professional accounting designation or an accounting credential are
advised to make inquiries with the Chartered Professional Accountants of Ontario (CPA Ontario)
before deciding to complete this program. See Additional Information for further details.
This program prepares you for entry-level positions in:
- financial accounting
- managerial accounting
- payables and receivables
- taxation
Graduates typically find employment in roles such as:
- accounts payable clerk
- accounts receivable clerk
- bookkeeper payroll clerk
- junior staff accountant
SUCCESS FACTORS
This program is well-suited for students who:
- Enjoy problem solving and critical-thinking activities.
- Are inquisitive and have an analytical nature.
- Can work well independently and in a group.
2
Business - Accounting
- Are detailed-oriented, organized and adaptable.
- Are comfortable using a variety of computer applications.
- Possess a high standard of ethics.
Employment
Graduates may pursue employment opportunities in various entry-level positions including
accounts receivables or payables, bookkeeping or payroll responsibilities. Roles include:
accounting assistant, accounts payable clerk, accounts receivable clerk, bookkeeper, and payroll
clerk.
Learning Outcomes
The graduate has reliably demonstrated the ability to:
- Record financial transactions in compliance with Canadian Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles for sole proprietorships, partnerships, private enterprises, publicly accountable
enterprises and non-profit organizations.
- Prepare and present financial statements, reports and other documents in compliance with
Canadian Generally Accepted Accounting Principles for sole proprietorships, partnerships and
private enterprises.
- Contribute to recurring decision-making by applying fundamental management accounting
concepts.
- Prepare individuals` income tax returns and basic tax planning in compliance with relevant
legislation and regulations.
- Analyze organizational structures, the interdependence of functional areas, and the impact
those relationships can have on financial performance.
- Analyze, within a Canadian context, the impact of economic variables, legislation, ethics,
technological advances and the environment on an organization`s operations.
- Outline the elements of an organization`s internal control system and risk management.
- Contribute to recurring decision-making by applying fundamental financial management
concepts.
- Identify and apply discipline-specific practices that contribute to the local and global
community through social responsibility, economic commitment and environmental
stewardship.
Program of Study
Level: 01 Courses Hours
ACC2201 Financial Accounting I 56.0
BUS2301 Business Computer Applications 42.0
ENL1813B Communications I 42.0
MGT2201 Business Fundamentals 42.0
QUA2210 Basic Business Mathematics 56.0
Level: 02 Courses Hours
ACC2202 Financial Accounting II 56.0
ACC2343 Spreadsheet Applications 56.0
3
Business - Accounting
ECO2200 Economic Issues 42.0
ENL1823B Communications II 42.0
FIN2230 Finance 42.0
Level: 03 Courses Hours
ACC2209 Financial Accounting III 70.0
ACC2233 Management Accounting I 56.0
ACC2262 Introduction to Personal Taxation 56.0
ACC2385 Accounting Software Applications 56.0
English General Education Elective: choose 1 Courses Hours
ENL1725 Canadian Identity 42.0
ENL1726 Symbols, Text and Meaning 42.0
ENL1798 Contemporary Canadian Issues 42.0
ENL1825 Communication Dynamics 42.0
ENL1829 The Art of Oratory 42.0
Level: 04 Courses Hours
ACC2211 Payroll and Compliance 56.0
ACC2234 Management Accounting II 56.0
ACC2265 Audit Principles and Business Issues 56.0
Elective: choose 1 Courses Hours
ACC0012 Integrated Accounting Practice 56.0
ACC0044 Work Experience 56.0
Choose one from equivalencies: Courses Hours
GED0214C General Education Elective 42.0

Fees for the 2023/2024 Academic Year
Tuition and related ancillary fees for this program can be viewed by using the Tuition and Fees
Estimator tool at https://www.algonquincollege.com/fee-estimator .
Further information on fees can be found by visiting the Registrar`s Office website at
https://www.algonquincollege.com/ro .
Fees are subject to change.
Additional program related expenses include:
- Books and supplies cost approximately $600 to $800 per term. However in Levels 03 and 04
of the program, books may cost up to $1,000.
- Books and supplies can be purchased from the campus store. For more information visit
https://www.algonquincollege.com/coursematerials .
4
Business - Accounting
Admission Requirements for the 2024/2025 Academic Year
College Eligibility
- Ontario Secondary School Diploma (OSSD) or equivalent. Applicants with an OSSD showing
senior English and/or Mathematics courses at the Basic Level, or with Workplace or Open
courses, will be tested to determine their eligibility for admission; OR
- Academic and Career Entrance (ACE) certificate; OR
- General Educational Development (GED) certificate; OR
- Mature Student status (19 years of age or older and without a high school diploma at the
start of the program). Eligibility may be determined by academic achievement testing for which
a fee of $50 (subject to change) will be charged.
Program Eligibility
- English, Grade 12 (ENG4C or equivalent).
- Mathematics, Grade 12 (MAP4C or equivalent).
- Applicants with international transcripts must provide proof of the subject-specific
requirements noted above and may be required to provide proof of language proficiency.
Domestic applicants with international transcripts must be evaluated through the International
Credential Assessment Service of Canada (ICAS) or World Education Services (WES).
- IELTS-International English Language Testing Service (Academic) Overall band of 6.0 with a
minimum of 5.5 in each band; OR TOEFL-Internet-based (iBT) Overall 80, with a minimum of 20
in each component: Reading 20; Listening 20; Speaking 20; Writing 20; OR Duolingo English
Test (DET) Overall 110, minimum of 110 in Literacy and no score below 95.
- Not sure if you meet all of the requirements? Academic Upgrading may be able to help with
that: https://www.algonquincollege.com/access .
Should the number of qualified applicants exceed the number of available places, applicants will be
selected on the basis of their proficiency in English and mathematics.
Admission Requirements for 2023/2024 Academic Year
College Eligibility
- Ontario Secondary School Diploma (OSSD) or equivalent. Applicants with an OSSD showing
senior English and/or Mathematics courses at the Basic Level, or with Workplace or Open
courses, will be tested to determine their eligibility for admission; OR
- Academic and Career Entrance (ACE) certificate; OR
- General Educational Development (GED) certificate; OR
- Mature Student status (19 years of age or older and without a high school diploma at the
start of the program). Eligibility may be determined by academic achievement testing for which
a fee of $50 (subject to change) will be charged.
Program Eligibility
- English, Grade 12 (ENG4C or equivalent).
- Mathematics, Grade 12 (MAP4C or equivalent).
- Applicants with international transcripts must provide proof of the subject specific
requirements noted above and may be required to provide proof of language proficiency.
Domestic applicants with international transcripts must be evaluated through the International
Credential Assessment Service of Canada (ICAS) or World Education Services (WES).
- IELTS-International English Language Testing Service (Academic) Overall band of 6.0 with a
minimum of 5.5 in each band; OR TOEFL-Internet-based (iBT) Overall 80, with a minimum of 20
in each component: Reading 20; Listening 20; Speaking 20; Writing 20.
5
Business - Accounting
Not sure if you meet all of the requirements? Academic Upgrading may be able to help with that:
https://www.algonquincollege.com/access/ .
Should the number of qualified applicants exceed the number of available places, applicants will be
selected on the basis of their proficiency in English and mathematics.
Application Information
BUSINESS - ACCOUNTING
Program Code 0214C01FWO
Applications to full-time day programs must be submitted with official transcripts showing
completion of the academic admission requirements through:
ontariocolleges.ca
60 Corporate Court
Guelph, Ontario N1G 5J3
1-888-892-2228
Students currently enrolled in an Ontario secondary school should notify their Guidance Office
prior to their online application at http://www.ontariocolleges.ca/ .
Applications for Fall Term and Winter Term admission received by February 1 will be given equal
consideration. Applications received after February 1 will be processed on a first-come, first-served
basis as long as places are available.
International applicants please visit this link for application process information:
https://algonquincollege.force.com/myACint/ .
For further information on the admissions process, contact:
Registrar`s Office
Algonquin College
1385 Woodroffe Ave
Ottawa, ON K2G 1V8
Telephone: 613-727-0002
Toll-free: 1-800-565-4723
TTY: 613-727-7766
Fax: 613-727-7632
Contact: https://www.algonquincollege.com/ro
Additional Information
This program offers a September start or January start. Students who start in January must
complete their second level of the program in the Spring term and continue into the third level in
the Fall term.
Classes in this program may be scheduled between 8:00 AM and 10:00 PM, Monday through
Friday.
Work placement is an option available to students in the fourth level of this program. Work
placement is only available in the Winter term. Participants of the optional work placement will
receive a course credit for ACC0044 (Work Experience) in lieu of taking a fifth course on campus
during the fourth level of the program. Students must meet eligibility requirements in order to
participate in the work placement.
To be eligible to apply for work placement, students must be registered full-time with the regular
on-campus program, must have completed all level 1, 2 and 3 courses, must not have any academic
encumbrances and must meet certain academic standings. Due to the high demand for work
placements, some students may be required to secure their own placement subject to approval by
the program coordinator.
Students considering completing a degree after their diploma may be able to apply some courses
towards a degree through various university articulation agreements. For further information see
https://www.algonquincollege.com/degree-pathways/list/ .
Students considering pursuing a professional accounting designation are advised to make inquiries
with the Chartered Professional Accountants of Ontario (CPA Ontario). Please note that Algonquin
6
Business - Accounting
College courses are not directly transferrable to CPA unless they are transferred through a
recognized articulation agreement with a university. For further information see
http://www.cpaontario.ca/become-a-cpa/get-started .
Course Descriptions
ACC0012 Integrated Accounting Practice
Students draw upon knowledge learned throughout the program to participate in weekly duties
that simulate authentic business practices. Students integrate and apply their knowledge of
fundamental accounting and taxation to complete various tasks using professional business writing
skills and computer software.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2209 and ACC2233 and ACC2385 or ACC2341 and ACC2354 and ACC2385
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC0044 Work Experience
Accounting experience is advantageous when students search for work after graduation. Students
apply the skills and knowledge acquired to date in the program to a practical work environment.
Students report to a select employer and complete accounting-related tasks. Upon completion of
the work placement, employers and students rate the experience.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2209 and ACC2233 and ACC2262 and ACC2385 or ACC2341 and ACC2344 and
ACC2354 and ACC2385
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2201 Financial Accounting I
This is the first course in a series of three financial accounting courses in this program. Students
learn to identify, measure, record and report financial transactions. Students learn the
fundamentals of the accounting cycle necessary to complete the financial statements and
accounting records of a business. Through a combination of in class lectures, practical exercises
and the use of computer assisted tools, students develop an understanding of essential accounting
concepts necessary for future studies.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2202 Financial Accounting II
Building on previous studies in financial accounting, students expand their knowledge of
fundamental accounting concepts involved in measuring and recording financial transactions,
including analyzing these transactions and reporting them in the financial records of a business.
Students experience a combination of in class lectures, practical exercises and the use of
computerized tools to aid in the progress and understanding of vital accounting concepts.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2201 or ACC1100 and ACC1211 or ACC2310
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2209 Financial Accounting III
This is the third and final financial accounting course in the program. Students examine the
transactions specific to corporations as well as more complex accounting topics. This course builds
on the material learned in the previous two financial accounting courses. Through a combination of
in class lectures, practical exercises and use of computer assisted tools, students develop an
understanding of essential accounting concepts necessary for the work place.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2202 or ACC2341
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2211 Payroll and Compliance
7
Business - Accounting
Payroll and statutory compliance reporting is mandatory for every business to adhere to. Students
learn how to apply payroll legislation to calculate deductions, net pay, and remittances, and
complete year-end payroll reporting. Students are introduced to the different types of
requirements with which businesses are expected to comply, including GST/HST, QST, EHT and
workers' compensation. Through a combination of theory and practical activities, students prepare
these submissions and calculations by reading through relevant legislation and completing
activities.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2202 or ACC2341
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2233 Management Accounting I
Managerial accounting aids organizations in making well-informed decisions helping businesses to
succeed. Students are introduced to key workplace skills by exploring the goals, methods and
ethics of managerial accounting including product costing methods and the flow of costs for
manufacturing companies. Additionally, students will focus on decision-making tools including,
cost-volume-profit and contribution analysis. The curriculum is delivered in lecture, case study and
problem-solving format.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2202 or ACC2341
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2234 Management Accounting II
Students continue to enhance key workplace skills and business ethics by further exploring the
goals and methods of managerial accounting. Specific topic areas include merchandising
budgeting, performance evaluation in decentralized businesses and financial statement analysis.
Students will also focus on business decisions using managerial accounting tools such as relevant
costing. The curriculum is delivered in lecture, case and problem-solving format making extensive
use of Excel.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2233 and ACC2343 or ACC2343 and ACC2354
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2262 Introduction to Personal Taxation
The ability to complete personal tax returns is an essential skill to have in the accounting field.
Using a variety of methods, including authentic tax cases, lectures and classroom discussions,
students use professional tax software to prepare personal Canadian tax returns for individuals
and unincorporated businesses. Basic principles of tax planning and tax legislation are covered. It is
strongly recommended that students use a Windows-based laptop (not a Mac).
Prerequisite(s): ACC2202 or ACC2313
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2265 Audit Principles and Business Issues
Students are introduced to current business issues relevant to Canadian organizations as well as
key auditing concepts that help to guide business ethics and decisions. Topics discussed include
the Canadian business environment and the current issues it faces, the need for greater ethical and
responsible behaviour in light of recent business scandals, fraud and the need for internal controls,
risk management and financial statement analysis. Various types of audit and techniques are
examined by students. Classroom lectures are enhanced by reading current material and
researching information using various tools.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2209 or ACC2341
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2343 Spreadsheet Applications
Students enhance their knowledge of spreadsheets learned in BUS2301. Using Microsoft Excel,
students explore some of the more advanced Excel features, such as financial functions, charts,
8
Business - Accounting
logical functions, pivot tables, lists and look-up tables. These spreadsheet concepts are explored
through Excel-based lectures and hybrid activities including learning resource applications.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2201 and BUS2301 or ACC2313 and BUS2301 or ACC1100 and ACC1211 and
BUS2301
Corerequisite(s):none
ACC2385 Accounting Software Applications
It is a workplace expectation that students are comfortable using accounting software on a day-today basis. Students gain practical experience using computerized accounting software to record
transactions and prepare financial statements. Curriculum is delivered in lecture format and by
hands-on completion of cases using accounting software. A Windows-based laptop (not a Mac) is
strongly recommended.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2341 or ACC2202
Corerequisite(s):none
BUS2301 Business Computer Applications
The knowledge gained in this course provides students with a solid foundation for future learning in
other studies, and in business. Students learn a variety of tasks in Windows file management.
Students also learn tasks and produce assignments in Microsoft Office for PC. Web-based software
running computer-based simulations and assessments are used to support and enrich the learning
experience. It is strongly recommended that students use a PC. Mac students may be required to
install and learn additional software to successfully complete the course.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ECO2200 Economic Issues
Knowledge of contemporary economic issues is essential to understanding the world in which we
live. Students examine the fundamental economic issues faced by modern economies with an
emphasis on the use of economic models to analyze economic developments accurately and
objectively. Key economic problems faced by society, and policy alternatives that governments
may use to deal with these problems are also investigated. Influence of economics on student civic,
working and personal lives is explored through lectures, discussions, and monitoring of current
economic events.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ENL1725 Canadian Identity
Canadian identity is challenging to define, but depictions of our multicultural society are found and
explored in our writing. This course explores the importance of writers' perceptions of Canada,
how they promote their ideas through publishing, and how those published works have affected
Canadian society in recent history. Students are introduced to a wide range of writing with the aim
of exploring the theme of Canadian identity while enhancing students' awareness of the ethical
considerations necessary for a just society.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ENL1726 Symbols, Text and Meaning
Symbols and text are used to express, evoke, and manipulate an entire range of human emotions
and reactions. In this interactive, discussion-based course, students will explore historical and
contemporary approaches to using symbols, text, and language in conceptual and contemporary
art, graphic design and advertising, poetry and lyrics, and in online technology. Through discussion,
analysis, informal debate, and critical thinking, students will explore how symbols and text influence
individuals, society and culture.
9
Business - Accounting
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ENL1798 Contemporary Canadian Issues
A critical understanding of contemporary Canadian issues is vital to being an active member in our
democratic society. Students explore a variety of topics and analyze their ethical implications and
relevance to Canadian life. Discussions, debates and other collaborative activities offer
opportunities to consider recent controversies from different perspectives, and use of a variety of
media (e.g. newspapers, articles, and other resources online) allows for in-depth reflection on the
history and current state of a range of social and political topics.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ENL1813B Communications I
Communication remains an essential skill sought by employers, regardless of discipline or field of
study. Using a practical, vocation-oriented approach, students develop stronger grammar and
business-writing skills to become effective business communicators. Through a combination of
lectures, exercises, and independent learning, students practise writing, speaking, reading,
listening, locating and documenting information, and using technology to communicate
professionally. Students develop and strengthen communication skills that contribute to success in
both educational and workplace environments.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ENL1823B Communications II
Students continue to expand their practical writing and speaking skills for successful
communication in business. Using real-life scenarios and research skills, they produce informal
reports and proposals, deliver presentations to a live audience supported by technology, and
create a job-search package. Students create professional documents, such as information reports,
progress reports, justification/recommendation reports, summary reports, and minutes of meetings
to develop up-to-date writing skills. The job search package includes employment-readiness skills,
resumes, persuasive cover letters, and interview techniques. In all written work, students continue
to develop and enhance their grammar skills to meet professional, workplace standards.
Prerequisite(s): ENL1813B
Corerequisite(s):none
ENL1825 Communication Dynamics
Humans are dynamic, communicative, and socially interactive. Participants consider human
behaviour and its influence on interpersonal or impersonal connections with others by exploring
theories and ethical considerations of conformity, obedience and persuasion. Special attention is
paid to individual inner experiences, thoughts, feelings, emotions and introspections. Role play
learning and case studies allow participants to reflect and build upon their own observations and
experiences.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
ENL1829 The Art of Oratory
From ghost stories around the campfire to political speeches by world leaders, ethical oratory
plays a significant role in human interaction. Students examine the social significance of public
speaking while developing a deeper understanding of the theory, science, elements of form, and
persuasive devices underlying this art. Building on their own stories, students prepare, deliver, and
critique group workshops, as well as design, deliver, and critique individual presentations.
10
Business - Accounting
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
FIN2230 Finance
Understanding the fundamentals of financial management is necessary for strong financial
decision-making. Students develop an understanding of the goals of financial management,
financial analysis and planning, financial forecasting, working capital management, capital
budgeting concepts including present value and cashflow analysis. Build on your knowledge of
basic accounting and economics concepts through a combination of in class lectures, practical
exercises and use of computer assisted tools.
Prerequisite(s): ACC2201 and BUS2301 or ACC2310 and BUS2301 or ACC1100 and ACC1211 and
BUS2301
Corerequisite(s):none
GED0214C General Education Elective
Students choose one course, from a group of general education electives, which meets one of the
following five theme requirements: Arts in Society, Civic Life, Social and Cultural Understanding,
Personal Understanding, and Science and Technology.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
MGT2201 Business Fundamentals
Understanding the foundation of business is critical to anyone in the accounting field. This course
gives students a broad overview of critical elements of business including an introduction to
business structures, business processes, and various legal considerations. The use of practical
exercises provides students with a strong foundation of business knowledge for future work.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none
QUA2210 Basic Business Mathematics
The essentials of arithmetic and its applications, including fractions, decimals, percentages,
mathematics of buying and selling, payroll, taxes, depreciation and inventory are examined.
Students are introduced to the mathematics of finance, including simple and compound interest,
annuities, sinking funds, amortization and consumer credit.
Prerequisite(s): none
Corerequisite(s):none 