HB 2281
Initials EB Page 1 Natural Resources, Energy & Water
ARIZONA HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Fifty-sixth Legislature
Second Regular Session
HB 2281: solar royalties fund; county residents
Sponsor: Representative Biasiucci, LD 30
Committee on Natural Resources, Energy & Water
Overview
Requires each county Board of Supervisors (BOS) to establish a County Resident Solar 
Royalties Fund (Fund).
History
Counties are required to adopt the standards for issuing permits for the use of certain solar 
energy devices. Various specifications must be met depending on if the solar energy device is 
used for: 1) construction with solar photovoltaic systems that are intended to connect to a 
utility system; or 2) solar water heating systems (A.R.S. § 11-323).
Provisions
1. Requires the BOS of each county to establish a Fund to be administered by the county 
treasurer. (Sec. 1)
2. States that the Fund will be funded by each owner or operator of a solar panel in that 
county whose solar panel:
a) is located in the relevant county; and
b) is not:
i. owned by a public service corporation that is regulated by the Arizona Corporation 
Commission (ACC) or by a public power entity that has service territory in 
Arizona; and
ii. subject wholly to an exclusive power purchase agreement with either a public 
service corporation regulated by the ACC or a public power entity that has service
territory in Arizona. (Sec. 1)
3. Requires the private owner or operator of a solar panel not owned by a public service 
corporation to pay the county where the solar panel is located 12.5% of every $1 that is 
received in revenues from the sale of kilowatt-hours from the solar panel. (Sec. 1)
4. Specifies these monies must be deposited in the Fund. (Sec. 1)
5. Requires the county treasurer to: 
a) determine the total amount of monies in the Fund and the total number of qualified 
individuals who live in the county;
b) use monies in the Fund for administrative costs that do not exceed 10% of the monies 
in the Fund;
c) pay, by check, each qualified resident of the county an equal distribution of the total 
amount of monies available in the Fund, after administrative costs are paid. (Sec. 1)
☐ Prop 105 (45 votes) ☐ Prop 108 (40 votes) ☐ Emergency (40 votes) ☐ Fiscal Note
HB 2281
Initials EB Page 2 Natural Resources, Energy & Water
6. States that the requirements of the Fund do not apply to solar panels that:
a) produce power for only on-site use by a commercial or industrial user;
b) does not export power to the grid; or
c) is a rooftop solar power system, regardless of whether the system exports power to the 
grid. (Sec. 1)