**Risks of Exchange-Traded Shares**

ETF Shares are not individually redeemable. They can be redeemed with
the issuing Fund at NAV only by certain authorized broker-dealers and only in
large blocks known as Creation Units. Consequently, if you want to liquidate
some or all of your ETF Shares, you must sell them on the secondary market
at prevailing market prices.
The market price of ETF Shares may differ from NAV. Although it is
expected that the market price of an ETF Share typically will approximate its
NAV, there may be times when the market price and the NAV differ
significantly. Thus, you may pay more (premium) or less (discount) than NAV
when you buy ETF Shares on the secondary market, and you may receive
more or less than NAV when you sell those shares. These discounts and
premiums are likely to be greatest during times of market disruption or
extreme market volatility.
Vanguard’s website at vanguard.com shows the previous day’s closing NAV and
closing market price for the Fund’s ETF Shares. The website also discloses, in
the Premium/Discount Analysis section of the ETF Shares’ Price & Performance
page, how frequently the Fund’s ETF Shares traded at a premium or discount to
NAV (based on closing NAVs and market prices) and the magnitudes of such
premiums and discounts.
An active trading market may not exist. Although Vanguard ETF Shares are
listed on a national securities exchange, it is possible that an active trading
market may not be maintained. Although this could happen at any time, it is
more likely to occur during times of severe market disruption. If you attempt
to sell your ETF Shares when an active trading market is not functioning, you
may have to sell at a significant discount to NAV. In extreme cases, you may
not be able to sell your shares at all.
Trading may be halted. Trading of Vanguard ETF Shares on an exchange may
be halted by the activation of individual or marketwide trading halts (which halt
trading for a specific period of time when the price of a particular security or
overall market prices decline by a specified percentage). Trading of ETF Shares
may also be halted if (1) the shares are delisted from the listing exchange
without first being listed on another exchange or (2) exchange officials
determine that such action is appropriate in the interest of a fair and orderly
market or for the protection of investors.
Conversion Privilege
Owners of conventional shares issued by the Fund may convert those shares to
ETF Shares of equivalent value of the same fund. Please note that investors who
own conventional shares through a 401(k) plan or other employer-sponsored
15
retirement or benefit plan generally may not convert those shares to ETF Shares
and should check with their plan sponsor or recordkeeper. ETF Shares, whether
acquired through a conversion or purchased on the secondary market, cannot be
converted to conventional shares by a shareholder. Also, ETF Shares of one fund
cannot be exchanged for ETF Shares of another fund.
You must hold ETF Shares in a brokerage account. Thus, before converting
conventional shares to ETF Shares, you must have an existing, or open a new,
brokerage account. This account may be with Vanguard Brokerage Services®
or
with any other brokerage firm. To initiate a conversion of conventional shares to
ETF Shares, please contact your broker.
Vanguard Brokerage Services does not impose a fee on conversions from
Vanguard conventional shares to Vanguard ETF Shares. However, other
brokerage firms may charge a fee to process a conversion. Vanguard reserves
the right, in the future, to impose a transaction fee on conversions or to limit,
temporarily suspend, or terminate the conversion privilege.
Converting conventional shares to ETF Shares is generally accomplished as
follows. First, after your broker notifies Vanguard of your request to convert,
Vanguard will transfer your conventional shares from your account to the
broker’s omnibus account with Vanguard (an account maintained by the broker
on behalf of all its customers who hold conventional Vanguard fund shares
through the broker). After the transfer, Vanguard’s records will reflect your broker,
not you, as the owner of the shares. Next, your broker will instruct Vanguard to
convert the appropriate number or dollar amount of conventional shares in its
omnibus account to ETF Shares of equivalent value, based on the respective
NAVs of the two share classes.
Your Fund’s transfer agent will reflect ownership of all ETF Shares in the name of
the Depository Trust Company (DTC). The DTC will keep track of which ETF
Shares belong to your broker, and your broker, in turn, will keep track of which
ETF Shares belong to you.
Because the DTC is unable to handle fractional shares, only whole shares can be
converted. For example, if you owned 300.25 conventional shares, and this was
equivalent in value to 90.75 ETF Shares, the DTC account would receive 90 ETF
Shares. Conventional shares with a value equal to 0.75 ETF Shares (in this
example, that would be 2.481 conventional shares) would remain in the broker’s
omnibus account with Vanguard. Your broker then could either (1) credit your
account with 0.75 ETF Shares or (2) redeem the 2.481 conventional shares for
cash at NAV and deliver that cash to your account. If your broker chose to
redeem your conventional shares, you would realize a gain or loss on the
redemption that must be reported on your tax return (unless you hold the shares
16
in an IRA or other tax-deferred account). Please consult your broker for
information on how it will handle the conversion process, including whether it
will impose a fee to process a conversion.
If you convert your conventional shares to ETF Shares through Vanguard
Brokerage Services, all conventional shares for which you request conversion
will be converted to ETF Shares of equivalent value. Because no fractional
shares will have to be sold, the transaction will not be taxable.
Here are some important points to keep in mind when converting conventional
shares of a Vanguard fund to ETF Shares:
• The conversion process can take anywhere from several days to several
weeks, depending on your broker. Vanguard generally will process conversion
requests either on the day they are received or on the next business day.
Vanguard imposes conversion blackout windows around the dates when a fund
with ETF Shares declares dividends. This is necessary to prevent a shareholder
from collecting a dividend from both the conventional share class currently held
and also from the ETF share class to which the shares will be converted.
• Until the conversion process is complete, you will remain fully invested in a
fund’s conventional shares, and your investment will increase or decrease in
value in tandem with the NAV of those shares.
• The conversion transaction is nontaxable except, if applicable, to the very
limited extent previously described.
Shareholder Rights
The Fund’s Agreement and Declaration of Trust, as amended, requires a
shareholder bringing a derivative action on behalf of Vanguard Index Funds (the
Trust) that is subject to a pre-suit demand to collectively hold at least 10% of the
outstanding shares of the Trust or at least 10% of the outstanding shares of the
series or class to which the demand relates and to undertake to reimburse the
Trust for the expense of any counsel or advisors used when considering the
merits of the demand in the event that the board of trustees determines not to
bring such action. In each case, these requirements do not apply to claims
arising under the federal securities laws to the extent that any such federal
securities laws, rules, or regulations do not permit such application.
A precautionary note to investment companies: The Fund’s ETF Shares are
issued by a registered investment company, and therefore the acquisition of
such shares by other investment companies and private funds is subject to the
restrictions of Section 12(d)(1) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (the 1940
Act). SEC Rule 12d1-4 under the 1940 Act permits registered investment
companies to invest in other registered investment companies beyond the limits
17
in Section 12(d)(1), subject to certain conditions, including that funds with
different investment advisors must enter into a fund of funds
investment agreement.
Frequent Trading and Market-Timing
Unlike frequent trading of a Vanguard fund’s conventional (i.e., not
exchange-traded) classes of shares, frequent trading of ETF Shares does not
disrupt portfolio management or otherwise harm fund shareholders. The vast
majority of trading in ETF Shares occurs on the secondary market. Because
these trades do not involve the issuing fund, they do not harm the fund or its
shareholders. Certain broker-dealers are authorized to purchase and redeem ETF
Shares directly with the issuing fund. Because these trades typically are effected
in kind (i.e., for securities and not for cash), or are assessed a transaction fee
when effected in cash, they do not cause any of the harmful effects to the
issuing fund (as previously noted) that may result from frequent trading. For
these reasons, the board of trustees of each fund that issues ETF Shares has
determined that it is not necessary to adopt policies and procedures to detect
and deter frequent trading and market-timing of ETF Shares.
Portfolio Holdings
Please consult the Fund’s Statement of Additional Information or our website for
a description of the policies and procedures that govern disclosure of the Fund’s
portfolio holdings.
Turnover Rate
Although the Fund generally seeks to invest for the long term, it may sell
securities regardless of how long they have been held. Generally, an index fund
sells securities in response to redemption requests from shareholders of
conventional (i.e., not exchange-traded) shares or to changes in the composition
of its target index. Turnover rates for large-cap stock index funds tend to be low
because large-cap indexes—such as the S&P 500 Index—typically do not change
significantly from year to year. The Financial Highlights section of this
prospectus shows historical turnover rates for the Fund. A turnover rate of
100%, for example, would mean that the Fund had sold and replaced securities
valued at 100% of its net assets within a one-year period. In general, the greater
the turnover rate, the greater the impact transaction costs will have on a fund’s
return. Also, funds with high turnover rates may be more likely to generate
capital gains, including short-term capital gains, that must be distributed to
shareholders and will be taxable to shareholders investing through a
taxable account.