A credit freeze is a free service, guaranteed under federal law, that can protect you from credit fraud by limiting most access to your credit report until you lift it, or "thaw" your report. When your credit report is frozen, any lender who asks to evaluate your report for purposes of issuing a loan or other credit is denied access to the report. A security freeze won't affect your credit scores, but it will prevent lenders evaluating credit applications from obtaining your credit scores. A security freeze prevents criminals from opening new credit accounts in your name, but it also blocks your legitimate credit applications. So, if you have a credit freeze in place, you'll need to thaw your credit reports before applying for a new loan, credit card or other consumer credit. Once your application is processed, you can reinstate the freeze. Alternatively, you can use a temporary thaw to lift the freeze for a set window of time, such as one day or one week, after which the freeze will be reinstated. Credit freezes must be activated and lifted separately at each of the national credit bureaus. Procedures differ somewhat with each bureau, but all three enable requesting and lifting of security freezes online, by phone and via postal mail. There is never a fee for applying or removing a credit freeze. The law also allows you to establish and freeze credit reports for your minor children, to avoid misuse of their personal information. To place a credit freeze, you must provide details and proof of your identity and address, per instructions provided by the respective credit bureau. These typically include:
 

 Full name
 Date of birth
 All addresses you've used in the past two years
 Social Security number
 One copy of a government-issued identification, such as a driver's license or state ID card
 A recent copy of a utility bill, bank or insurance statement or similar, as proof of address
 How to Freeze Your Credit at Each Credit Bureau
 Experian TransUnion Equifax
 Online
 

 888-EXPERIAN
 

 Experian Security Freeze
 P.O. Box 9554
 Allen, TX 75013
 

 Online
 

 800-916-8800
 

 TransUnion
 P.O. Box 160
 Woodlyn, PA 19094
 

 Online
 

 888-298-0045
 

 Equifax Information Services LLC
 P.O. Box 105788
 Atlanta, GA 30348-5788
 

 

 You can remove a credit freeze using the same channels you use to set up a freeze. When lifting a credit freeze, you have the option of permanently unfreezing your credit, or lifting the freeze temporarily by indicating a length of time (one day or one week, for example) you want the freeze to be suspended. Policies vary by bureau, so make sure you understand what your options are before you begin the process. When you request a credit thaw by phone, your freeze will be lifted within one hour. If you use a credit bureau website or phone app to turn off a credit freeze, the process is virtually instantaneous. If you mail your request, the freeze will be lifted within three days of the credit bureau receiving your request. A credit lock lets you restrict and grant access to your credit reports essentially the same way a credit freeze does, but usually with extra features. Credit lock services provided by each credit bureau may differ in cost and functionality. For instance, in addition to enabling you to turn access to your Experian credit report on and off instantly, CreditLock from Experian also notifies you when anyone requests access to your locked credit report. This can help you spot unauthorized activity in your name. Experian CreditLock is available as part of a premium identity protection subscription for $24.99 per month, which also includes services such as:
 Monthly privacy scans and help getting information removed from covered people search sites
 Alerts to credit activity on your credit reports at all three national credit bureaus
 Quarterly FICO® Scores☉ based on your credit reports at all three national bureaus
 Daily FICO® Scores based on your Experian credit report
 Alerts when your personal data appears on the dark web
 Alerts to potential takeovers of your financial accounts
 Alerts when your Social Security number appears online
 Up to $1 million in identity theft insurance coverage
 Dedicated fraud resolution support
 Lost wallet assistance
 Equifax provides credit locks free to consumers through Lock & Alert, which also notifies users when anyone requests a credit check on a locked Equifax credit report.
 TransUnion includes credit file locking for both your TransUnion and Equifax credit files in its subscription service, which costs $29.95 per month.
 Each credit bureau requires entering your Social Security number and identity verification as part of its credit lock setup process.
 

 How to Lock Your Credit
 Enabling credit lock requires signing up for the service with the relevant credit bureau. Controls differ somewhat at each credit bureau, but each is a virtual on-off toggle that locks and unlocks the applicable credit report. The process for unlocking your credit report at each credit bureau is the reverse of the procedure for locking it: Using the credit bureau's app or website, locate the credit lock function and click the virtual switch to toggle from the locked setting to the unlocked If you're concerned your identity may have been stolen, or if you've discovered fraudulent activity on your credit reports, applying a security freeze or credit lock to your credit report will effectively prevent lenders from processing new credit applications filed in your name. Because they are free and guaranteed by law, credit freezes may be the better choice for consumers who don't want to pay for the service and don't want any extra features. When freezing or unfreezing your credit online, the process is essentially as quick and easy to use as a credit lock. A credit freeze is also the only option available if you want to restrict access to your minor children's credit information.
 

 Credit lock might be a better option if you're interested in the additional identity theft protection services included in the accompanying subscriptions. These might be particularly helpful in addressing the consequences of identity theft, and helping prevent additional fraud. When weighing the benefits of credit freeze and credit lock, it may also be worth considering a third option, the fraud alert. You have the right to place a fraud alert on your credit report, and doing so instructs lenders to verify your identity before processing a credit application in your name. This allows you to apply for loans and other forms of credit without having to remember to thaw or unlock your credit reports. What's more, placing a fraud alert with any one credit bureau automatically applies the alert to all three credit bureaus. You'll have to remove each separately, however.
 

 Learn more >> Fraud Alert vs. Credit Freeze: What's the Difference?
 

 The Bottom Line
 Credit freezes and credit locks offer valuable protection for your credit reports, as either a precaution or a response to criminal abuse of your credit. When managed online, both freezes and locks are quick and easy to use, and highly effective at blocking credit applications in your name—both fraudulent and legitimate ones. If you decide to apply a credit lock or security freeze, remember to disable it before you apply for a new loan or credit account.