Lands and interest in lands owned by the United States (i.e., federal lands) have been withdrawn
from agency management under various public land laws. Federal land withdrawals typically
seek to preclude lands from being used for certain purposes (i.e., withdraw them)in order to
dedicate them to other purposes or to maintain other public values. For example, some laws
established or expanded federal land designations, such as wilderness areas or units of the
National Park System, and withdrew the lands apparently to foster the primary purposes of these
designations. Withdrawals affect lands managed by agencies including the four major land
management agencies: the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(FWS), and National Park Service (NPS), all in the Department of the Interior, and the U.S.
Forest Service (FS), in the Department of Agriculture.

The first component of the example provision generally would bar third parties from applying to take ownership and
obtaining possession of the lands or resources on the lands under public land laws. However, the lack of a comprehensive list
of public land laws—and the lack of a single, consistent definition of the term public land laws itself over time—makes it
challenging to determine the precise meaning and applicability. The second component generally would prevent the
withdrawn lands from being available for new mining (e.g., under theGeneral Mining Law of 1872). The third component
generally would prevent the withdrawn lands from being available for new mineral leasing, sale of mineral materials, and
geothermal leasing (e.g., under the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, Materials Act of 1947, and Geothermal Steam Act of 1970).
Together, the three components primarily would affect BLM and FS, because laws governing lands managed by those
agencies generally allow for energy and mineral development and provide broader authority to convey lands out of federal
ownership than laws governing NPS and FWS lands. Typically, the three components would not bar various surface uses that
otherwise might be allowed, possibly including recreation, hunting, and livestock grazing. However, some uses might be
limited by Congress or by subsequent agency actions, such as amendments to land management plans, if the uses are
inconsistent with the withdrawal’s purposes.
Defining “Valid Existing Rights”
As used in legislated withdrawals, a “valid existing right” is a third-party (i.e., nonfederal)
interest in federal land that the relevant federal agency cannot terminate or unduly limit.82 To have
a valid existing right, the third party must
 have met the requirements under the relevant law to obtain a property interest in
the land (i.e., the property interest must be valid);
 have had a protectable interest before the United States withdraws the land (i.e.,
the property interest was existing at the time of withdrawal);83 and
 possess a property interest (or in some cases a possessory interest) in the land that
constitutes a right for purposes of withdrawals (i.e., it must be a right).84
Valid
The validity of the interest depends on whether the third party has met the requirements of the
law under which it alleges to have secured the property interest. First, the interest itself must be
legitimate (i.e., supported by evidence of the factual basis required by the relevant statute). For
example, to secure a mining claim as a valid right under the mining laws, a claimant must
demonstrate that they have made a “valid discovery” of a valuable mineral deposit that can be
extracted and marketed.

Existing
The second requirement for a third party to have a “valid existing right” is that the property
interest existed at the time of withdrawal.90 Depending on the legal basis for the right, a third
party obtains an interest in federal land either (1) once they meet the statutory requirements,
without the federal agency having to act, or (2) when the federal agency exercises its discretion to
grant the property interest after the third party meets the relevant statutory requirements.
91 Third
parties claiming property interests under laws that do not require the federal agency to grant the
interest have an existing property interest as soon as they meet the law’s requirements.92 For
example, a claimant under federal mining laws is entitled to the claim once they complete the
statutory steps described above (discovery and location).93 Whether the Secretary of the Interior
has issued a land patent to transfer title to the claimant does not affect the claimant’s right to the
land; once federal mining law requirements are met, the property right “vests” (i.e., ownership is
transferred to the claimant) and the right exists.
94 In some cases, the claimant need not complete
all of the required steps before the withdrawal to obtain an existing right. If the law allows claims
to relate back to occupancy (i.e., be back-dated to when the claimant first occupied the land),
claimants may have existing rights if they occupied the land before withdrawal and ultimately
complete the remaining steps required by law.95
Other laws provide that a claimant’s interest in federal land only becomes a valid existing right
once the Secretary has acted to make it valid.
96 For example, third parties acquire oil and gas
leases when the Secretary of the Interior approves their application.
97 Although courts and
agencies have recognized these leases as valid existing rights in various contexts, they have not
recognized applications for oil and gas leases or other leasehold interests in federal land.

Courts and agencies have at times concluded that a third party has a valid existing right despite
not having established an interest by law before the land is withdrawn.
99 The Solicitor of the
Department of the Interior has offered “an expansive interpretation of ‘existing valid rights’ in the
context of withdrawal”
100 that includes “all prior valid applications for entry, selection, or
location, which were substantially complete at the date of the withdrawal” and “[c]laims under
the Color of Title Act of December 22, 1928.”101 A court or agency also may recognize a valid
existing right, even if the claimant is not legally entitled to it, because it would be equitable (i.e.,
consistent with the principles of justice).
102
Rights
Not all uses of or interests in federal land qualify as valid existing “rights.” The third party
usually must have obtained a property interest in the land to have a right; merely using the land
generally is insufficient to establish a valid existing right.
103 To determine whether the asserted
interest qualifies as a right, courts and agencies examine the law authorizing the interest and the
withdrawal law.104 Courts and agencies have recognized a number of property interests as
protected rights, such as entitlements to land patents under mining laws and entry-based laws
such as the Homestead Acts and the Trade and Manufacturing Site Act;105 land grants to states;106
rights-of-way;107 and mineral leases.108
Courts and agencies also have deemed certain possessory interests protected, the most common
example being perfected but unpatented mining claims.
109 However, they have declined to
recognize other possessory interests as valid existing rights.110 Courts and agencies have generally
not recognized permits, such as grazing permits, as protected property rights for purposes of
interpreting withdrawals, absent a specific provision in the withdrawal law or order.111

