One of the main ways in which the economy impacts CRE is via interest rates. Higher interest rates in both the short term and the long term are likely to affect industries that rely on credit, such as CRE.6 Tighter credit conditions can affect the ability of builders to obtain financing for new construction. Higher borrowing costs can in turn reduce CRE growth or increase rents for CRE occupants. If CRE owners ultimately cannot make payments on higher cost loans, this could result in losses for those individuals and institutions that finance CRE. In recent years, interest rates rose significantly, one of several fundamental shifts in the economic environment. Prior to the pandemic, inflation was low and stable despite over a decade of historically low interest rates and accommodative monetary policy.7 This led to low borrowing costs. However, inflation began rising in 2021, reaching highs not seen since the 1980s, and interest rates have also risen significantly. In response to inflation, the Federal Reserve (Fed) raised the federal funds rate (FFR) over five percentage points between March 2022 and July 2023.8 Other interest rates in the economy responded to the Fed’s actions, resulting in a higher interest rate environment and higher borrowing costs. The Fed has yet to begin lowering rates but is expected to begin lowering rates in late 2024. The Fed projects that the appropriate monetary policy path will result in an FFR of 2.8% in the longer run—relatively low in historical terms but higher than most of the period since the 2007-2009 financial crisis and recession.9 CRE is also likely to be affected by other economic conditions, including demand and investment behavior. Despite the Fed’s efforts to reduce demand through interest rate hikes, the economy has remained unexpectedly robust in the face of monetary tightening particularly with respect to metrics that could affect CRE, such as consumer spending and labor market conditions. While monetary tightening has weighed somewhat on investment, including residential investment (which includes multifamily CRE properties), consumer spending has been strong, which could help retail CRE properties. Overall, the labor market closed out 2023 relatively strong with unemployment at 3.7%, and economic growth largely beat expectations in 2023 at 2.5% for the year. 10 While the first quarter of 2024 did show an increase in the unemployment rate, higher than-anticipated inflation, and slower growth, the economy remains in relatively good condition, with growth at a strong 3.0% in the second quarter. A continued strong economic performance could help buoy CRE markets despite higher borrowing costs. Economic Outlook for CRE Since the Fed began raising rates in response to high inflation in March 2022, it has been trying to achieve a soft landing—a return to low inflation while maintaining moderate economic growth and full employment.11 Achieving a soft landing after sustained monetary policy tightening is notoriously difficult. Historically, most periods of sustained tightening have been followed by hard landings, meaning recessions. Nonetheless, the recent period of monetary policy tightening has so far resulted in falling inflation without a significant decline in employment or economic activity. A soft landing would be advantageous to CRE, as it would be to all sectors of the economy. All else equal, low and stable inflation, moderate growth, and a strong labor market would lead to robust and sustainable demand, including consumer spending and business investment. A hard landing would lead to lower demand and likely lower CRE growth. In terms of CRE, the path of interest rates may be of particular policy interest given the role they play in CRE. In the projected scenario of a soft landing, interest rates are likely to decrease beginning this year. As of June 2024, the Fed’s Federal Open Market Committee projected that one rate decrease in the second half of 2024 would be appropriate, with the median projected appropriate policy path resulting in an FFR of 5.1% at the end of 2024, 4.1% at the end of 2025, and 3.1% at the end of 2026.12 In August 2024, Fed Chair Jerome Powell stated that “the time has come for policy to adjust,” indicating likely rate cuts beginning in September 2024.13 However, changes in the FFR are unlikely to affect longer-term interest rates by the same magnitude. For example, an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development model for long-term interest rates forecasts that the rate on a 10-year government security will be 3.9% in the third quarter of 2025.14 The yield on a 10-year Treasury as of July 2, 2024, was 4.43%.15 Easing credit conditions could boost construction and CRE growth generally, although there is a high degree of uncertainty about how much interest rates will ultimately fall. While most economists are not predicting an imminent recession, it is possible that one could occur nonetheless. For example, the recent increases in the unemployment rate have some concerned that the economy is weakening.16 In this scenario, the Fed may opt to lower the FFR either more quickly or by a larger magnitude than it may otherwise have done. Such an economic contraction would likely hurt CRE growth, but the monetary response would help it to recover, all else equal. Structural Changes Affecting CRE Properties While certain broad economic conditions may be expected to affect CRE broadly, the impacts can look quite different based on type. For example, COVID-19 was a shock to all CRE segments as well as the broader economy. However, based on the nature of the pandemic, demand for office or retail space took relatively big hits, as restrictions on in-person contact made spending in brick and-mortar stores difficult and resulted in increased telework. 17 While the performance of CRE sectors has largely been mixed, the office sector in particular is continuing to show signs of stress and has the highest potential to cause stress in the banking sector. For example, while vacancy rates are up since pre-pandemic for multifamily and retail, they are elevated to a lesser degree than in the office sector, which shows record-level vacancy rates. In the industrial sector, vacancy rates have fallen since the beginning of the pandemic. Other metrics, such as rents, tell a less consistent story across sectors over this period. Nonetheless, as of the second quarter of 2024, quarterly effective rent growth was positive in all sectors apart from office.18 The Office Sector The pandemic resulted in a structural shift away from in-office work, resulting in high vacancy rates for this segment of CRE that persist today. With the rise in telework, many companies renting space from the office subsector of CRE owners are not renewing their leases. This is evidenced by higher office vacancy rates (see Figure 1), which continue to rise, hitting a record 20.1% in the second quarter of 2024, according to Moody’s Analytics, a credit rating agency. 19 Consequently, the number of office property rental leases has declined, generating lower revenues and potentially imperiling the ability of the property owners to pay back financing costs. According to Moody’s, effective rents have been negative or largely unchanged for the four quarters ending in Q2 2024 (see Figure 1).20 To minimize losses, some CRE owners have been willing to break leases and renegotiate terms with tenants. 21 Further, while norms surrounding remote and hybrid work have shifted in the past few years owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, the extent to which remote work will shift the CRE landscape is uncertain. While rates of office utilization are lower than prior to the pandemic (i.e., February 2020), according to some estimates, they have, on average, trended upward in selected major cities after the initial onset (i.e., March 2020) of the pandemic (see Figure 2). 