G. U.S. Trustees and Private Trustees The U.S. Trustee Program is part of the federal government’s Department of Justice, not a part of the courts. It was established to handle the administrative functions of bankruptcy cases and to ensure the integrity of the bankruptcy system across the nation. The program operates with twenty-one regional offices and ninety-four field offices, which are headed by U.S. trustees and assistant U.S. trustees, respectively. See 28  U.S.C. §§  581–589b. In the six judicial districts in Alabama and North Carolina, the Bankruptcy Administrator Program, rather than the U.S. Trustee Program, handles the administrative functions. See § 302(d) (3)(1) of the Bankruptcy Judges, United States Trustees, and Family Farmer Act of 1986, P.L. 99-554, 100 Stat. 3119, 3123, and § 317(b) of the Federal Courts Study Committee Implementation Act of 1990. The functions of the U.S. trustees are enumerated in 28 U.S.C. § 581(a), and primarily include (1) appointing and supervising the private trustees who collect and disburse funds to creditors in Chapter 7, 12, and 13 cases; (2) ensuring compliance with the Bankruptcy Code with respect to information provided in schedules, disclosure statements, reorganization plans, and other filings; (3) reviewing fee applications of professionals, such as attorneys and accountants, who serve in Chapter 11 reorganization cases; and (4) monitoring bankruptcy cases for fraud and referring criminal matters to the U.S. attorney for prosecution. Trustees do not have independent enforcement powers; rather, they must request the court to rule on matters of administration for which there is no voluntary compliance. The U.S. trustee is responsible for establishing a panel of private trustees to serve in Chapter 7 cases. When a bankruptcy petition is filed under Chapter 7, the U.S. trustee appoints a disinterested person from this panel to serve as interim trustee. At the first meeting of creditors, the creditors may elect another person as trustee, although such elections are rare. The U.S. trustee is also responsible 44 Basic Overview of Litigation in U.S. Courts fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 3.4.A for appointing one or more “standing” trustees to administer all Chapter 12 and 13 cases filed in a geographic region. In Chapter 11 cases, no trustee is appointed unless the court orders the appointment after notice and a hearing. If the court orders an appointment, the U.S. trustee designates the person who will serve, unless a party-in-interest timely requests that the trustee be elected by the creditors. In Chapter 7, 12, and 13 cases, the U.S. trustee may act as trustee if a private trustee is unavailable, although this is rarely done. The code does not provide for the appointment of a trustee in Chapter 9 cases. 28  U.S.C. §  586, 11 U.S.C. §§ 701–704, 1202, 1104–1106, 1302.    § 3.4 Appeals A. Processing Appeals The steps in an appeal are as follows: 1. Filing a notice of appeal 2. Preparing the record on appeal 3. Docketing the appeal 4. Filing the appellant’s brief 5. Filing the appellee’s brief 6. Filing the appellant’s reply brief 7. Deciding if the court dispenses with oral argument, or scheduling of oral argument 8. Hearing oral argument 9. Deliberating by the court 10. Filing the opinion 11. Filing a petition for rehearing 12. Issuing the mandate (the final stage in the appellate process unless the party applies to the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari) The Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure establish certain procedural uniformity among the thirteen courts of appeals. However, there are still some differences in the procedures in the various circuits. Each court has local rules and internal operating procedures that describe the precise procedure to be followed 45 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 3.4.B when there is any variation from the rules and, in some instances, that elaborate on or amplify the rules. See section 4.2. B. Notice of Appeal The timely filing of a notice of appeal is a jurisdictional requirement for any appeal. Appeals may be filed to challenge decisions of the district court, an administrative agency, or a bankruptcy appellate panel. Appeals of agency decisions may be classified as original proceedings in the court of appeals. The notice of appeal is filed in the district court. The purpose of the notice is to inform opposing counsel and the court that an appeal is being taken. The clerk of that court is required by Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 3(d) to forward a copy of the notice to the clerk of the court of appeals. The time for filing commences when the judgment or order is entered in the district court from which the appeal is taken. The running of that time is tolled by the filing of certain posttrial motions in the district court, and the filing of such motions after a notice of appeal has been filed may vitiate the notice, requiring a new notice of appeal to be filed after the motion is decided. Fed. R. App. P. 4(a). Rule 4 provides the following time periods for filing notices of appeal: • private civil cases: 30 days • civil cases in which the United States is a party: 60 days • criminal cases: 10 days • criminal cases in which appeal by the government is authorized by statute (such as appeals from sentences under the 1984 Sentencing Reform Act): 30 days Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, courts of appeals take steps to ensure that all procedural requirements have been met. The clerk’s office may send counsel a case-opening letter to establish schedules for record preparation and briefing. Circuit mediators may conduct initial mediation/settlement conferences to discuss the issues in the case, with a view to eliminating the briefing of frivolous issues and to discuss the possibility of settlement. See Mediation & Conference Programs in the Federal Courts of Appeals: A Sourcebook for Judges and Lawyers (Federal Judicial Center, 2d ed. 2006). 46 Basic Overview of Litigation in U.S. Courts fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 3.4.D C. Record Preparation For an appellate court to review the proceedings in a trial court, appellate judges must have a record available of what occurred in the trial court. Local court rules prescribe the requirements for counsel to provide the district court with the record or excerpts of the record (sometimes referred to as a short record), which may include original papers and exhibits filed in the trial court plus a reporter’s transcript of any relevant proceedings. The Sentencing Reform Act requires that the record in a criminal case must also include “(1) that portion of the record . . . that is designated as pertinent by either of the parties; (2) the presentence report; and (3) the information submitted during the sentencing proceeding.” 18 U.S.C. § 3742(d). This information will often be under seal, because it is confidential. The Federal Rules prescribe time limits (deadlines) for providing the record on appeal to the court of appeals. During this time, the appellant must order a transcript of proceedings if one is needed and make arrangements to pay the court reporter for services or, in courts using electronic sound recording for the official record, the clerk of court. The district court clerk assembles the other papers or electronic files that constitute the record on appeal. The district court has the power to extend for an additional fifty days the time for preparing and sending the record on appeal, after which the court of appeals itself may grant extensions. Additional time may be needed if the court reporter has not finished transcribing the proceedings or if counsel has failed to order the transcript in a timely manner. To prevent undue delay, the appellate courts have the discretion to refuse to grant time extensions and may impose sanctions on the appellant or the reporter for unreasonable delays in preparing the record on appeal. D. Docketing the Appeal When the record is completed, or earlier if desired, the appellant must docket the appeal. This is primarily a clerical process and is performed in the office of the clerk of the court of appeals. Unless the appellant is exempt from payment, a docket fee is charged. The clerk of court opens an appropriate file and record and sends a notice to the parties. Frequently, docketing takes place when the record on appeal is filed. The filing of the record provides the base date for most subsequent proceedings in the case. 47 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 3.4.E E. Briefs and Joint Appendices Because the appellant has the burden of establishing that the trial court erred, it files the opening brief. The appellee then files a brief in response; if the appellant wishes, the appellant may file a reply brief responding to new matters raised in the appellee’s brief. The Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure establish standards for format, color of brief covers, content, methods of reproduction, number of copies, and times for filing of briefs. The local rules for a circuit may impose further requirements. The schedule for filing briefs is as follows: • appellant’s brief: 40 days after filing the record • appellee’s brief: 30 days after service of appellant’s brief • reply brief: 14 days after service of appellee’s brief Some courts of appeals have modified the requirements and standards of the federal rules in certain cases or classes of cases. One of the more common modifications permits parties appealing in forma pauperis to file fewer copies of their briefs. While the briefs are being prepared, the parties are required to determine which portions of the record on appeal are relevant to the issues raised; the appellant is required to reproduce these portions as an appendix to the briefs. There may be only one appendix containing the portions relied on by both the appellant and the appellee, which would be referred to as a joint appendix. If any relevant material is omitted from the appendix, the court is free to refer to the original record. Multiple copies of the appendix may be filed so that each judge and, if needed, each law clerk may have one. Some courts of appeals have eliminated the requirement of an appendix and permit the substitution of photocopies of relatively few parts of the record, usually called record excerpts. The local rules of those courts describe the substitute requirements. Local rules also address procedures for electronic filing. You should become familiar with the rules and procedures in your court. F. Oral Argument If the court does not decide a case exclusively on the basis of the briefs and written record (see section 4.6.B on screening cases to select those appeals to be decided without oral argument), the parties are given an opportunity to present their arguments to the court orally. Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 34 permits the court to fix the time allowed for oral argument. Courts may allow counsel to file a request in advance for additional time, and the courts have the discretion whether to grant these requests. Generally, not more than two attorneys are 48 Basic Overview of Litigation in U.S. Courts fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 3.4.G permitted to argue for each side. Some court rules encourage argument by only one attorney for each party. Many appellate judges require their law clerks to prepare a memorandum on each case (called a bench memo) for the judge to review before hearing oral arguments. In some circuits, the law clerk for one judge may prepare a memorandum to be circulated among the three judges on the panel prior to oral argument. The judges will study the briefs before oral argument. The appellant begins the argument. Because the judges have read the briefs and are therefore familiar with the issues, they sometimes begin questioning the attorney shortly after the argument begins. After the appellant’s argument is completed, the appellee responds, followed by any reply by the appellant (if the appellant reserved time for rebuttal). Although the arguments are recorded, so that the judges and their law clerks may later review them, some circuit judges may request one of their law clerks to attend oral argument and take notes of important matters, citations of new authorities, and concessions made during the argument. Most cases are heard by a panel of three judges, but a case may be heard en banc in cases involving a question of exceptional importance or in order to secure or maintain uniformity of decisions. A case heard en banc is heard by all of the active judges on the court and any senior judge of the circuit who sat on the panel that originally heard the case (or, in the Ninth Circuit, by a limited en banc, consisting of the chief judge and ten additional judges selected by lot). En banc hearings are held only when ordered by a majority of the active judges on the court. Some courts hold hearings in only one location, but most hold court in a number of locations within the circuit. G. Deliberation After a case has been argued and submitted to the court, the panel of judges who heard the argument meets to arrive at a decision. In most courts, these meetings are held immediately after the completion of each day’s arguments. Appellate courts perform three distinct functions. First, they decide the controversies before them. Second, they supervise the courts within their jurisdiction. Third, they determine the growth and development of the common law and the interpretation of federal statutory and constitutional law within their jurisdiction. Each of these functions can become important during the decisional phase of an appeal because the court must not only reach the correct result but also explain in its opinion the rationale for its decision. 49 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 3.4.H In most cases, the court arrives at a tentative decision at the first meeting. At that time, the presiding judge (the senior active circuit judge sitting on the panel) assigns the case to one member of the panel, who later writes an opinion to be submitted to the others for approval. When the judges do not reach agreement so readily, panel members may exchange memoranda about the case and schedule additional meetings or telephone conferences for further discussion. Law clerks for appellate judges should know and follow the court’s internal rules and its customs concerning communications between chambers. H. Opinion and Judgment The final product of the court in most appeals is a written opinion setting forth the decision and the reasoning behind it. The increased number of cases and the burden of writing formal opinions in every case has caused appellate courts to use alternatives to formal opinions (such as memorandum, order, or summary opinions) in many cases, such as those involving only the application of settled principles to a specific fact situation. Local rules or policies may guide the members of the court in deciding which cases deserve full opinions and which opinions should be published. When a panel has agreed on an opinion, the authoring judge electronically transmits it to the clerk of court for public docketing and release. All courts post opinions on the court’s public website. In some courts, before opinions are released, they are circulated to all active judges on the court with a time limit for making suggestions. Sometimes when a judge or a group of judges disagrees with the majority decision reached by their colleagues and they feel strongly enough about it, the judge or judges will write a dissenting opinion explaining what aspects of the decision they disagree with and why. Even though they express opinions that did not prevail, dissents can contribute to the legal debate over the issues at hand and provide judges in similar cases with different perspectives. I. Rehearing The party who loses an appeal may file a petition for rehearing within fourteen days after judgment is entered. That petition attempts to persuade the panel that the decision was erroneous and should be withdrawn or revised. The prevailing party may not file a response to the petition unless one is requested by the court. Most petitions for rehearing are denied. The losing party may also move for a rehearing en banc. That motion is circulated to all members of the original panel and all active judges who did not sit 50 Basic Overview of Litigation in U.S. Courts fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 3.4.K on the panel. Only the active circuit judges and any senior judge who was a member of the original panel may request a vote on the suggestion to rehear the appeal en banc, and only the active circuit judges may vote on whether the appeal should be reheard en banc; if a rehearing en banc is granted, only active circuit judges and senior circuit judges from the circuit who were members of the original panel may sit on the rehearing. By local rule, a circuit may impose time limitations within which a member of the court may request an answer to a petition for rehearing or rehearing en banc or a vote on such a petition. J. Mandate The mandate is the document by which the court of appeals formally notifies the district court of its decision and by which jurisdiction for any necessary additional proceedings is conferred upon the district court. The mandate is issued by the clerk of court seven calendar days after the time to file a petition for rehearing expires, or seven calendar days after entry of an order denying a timely petition for panel rehearing, petition for rehearing en banc, or motion for stay of mandate, whichever is later. These times may be shortened or lengthened by court order. Fed. R. App. P. 41(b). The losing party may request by motion that the issuance of the mandate be stayed in order to maintain the status quo during the pendency of an application for a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court. The court of appeals may require that a bond be posted as a condition to staying the issuance of the mandate. K. Motions During the course of an appeal, the parties may file a variety of motions. Most of these are procedural and, to the extent permitted by the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, some courts have authorized their clerks of court or other court unit executives to act on motions, for example, motions • for extensions of time to perform any of the acts required by local rules or the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure • for relief from specific requirements of the local rules or the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure • for permission to alter the form or content of the record on appeal; • for leave to file amicus curiae briefs • for delay in the issuance of the mandate • for voluntary dismissal of the appeal 51 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 3.4.L Motions requiring action by a judge or panel of judges are those • on issues relating to criminal cases or suits for postconviction relief such as motions for appointment of counsel, leave to appeal in forma pauperis, certificates of probable cause, and bail pending appeal • for stays or injunctions pending appeal • for leave to file interlocutory appeals • for issues relating to stays granted in the district court • for permission to file a brief containing more pages than the number fixed by the rules • for issues relating to the time allowed for oral argument • to dismiss an appeal filed by the appellee In most courts, the staff attorney’s office is responsible for reviewing motions and referring them to judges for appropriate disposition. L. Emergency Proceedings Both district courts and courts of appeals are frequently asked to make decisions on an emergency basis. In the appellate courts, these occasions usually arise when a litigant or a lower court is about to take some action that may cause irreparable injury. The potentially aggrieved party seeks redress by motion for stay or injunction pending appeal or by petition for writ of mandamus or prohibition. In the district courts, these matters usually arise through a request for a temporary restraining order. Each court has developed internal procedures for handling these matters efficiently, but the procedures vary among courts. Courts have also established special procedures for handling emergency appeals of capital (death penalty) cases. Law clerks should become familiar with the procedures established by the local rules and the judge’s own practices.    § 3.5 Courts of Specialized Jurisdiction You may also encounter litigation from one of the various special courts established by Congress. The term special courts derives from their specialized jurisdiction. 52 Basic Overview of Litigation in U.S. Courts fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 3.5.D A. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, based in Washington, D.C., has jurisdiction over appeals from the following: district courts in cases involving patents and certain claims against the United States; the U.S. Court of Federal Claims; the Court of International Trade; the Court of Veterans Appeals; the Merit Systems Protection Board; the Patent and Trademark Office; the boards that decide government contract issues; and a few other Article I agencies. B. Court of International Trade The Court of International Trade, based in New York City, hears cases concerning the value or classification of imports. Its judges may sit by designation on other Article III courts. C. U.S. Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation This panel was created to consider transferring civil actions involving one or more common questions of fact pending in different districts to a single district for coordinated or consolidated pretrial proceedings. The panel consists of seven district and circuit judges who are appointed by the Chief Justice and sit on the panel in addition to their regular judicial assignments. The panel maintains a roster of transferee judges to whom it assigns the cases it certifies for transfer. For discussion of multidistrict litigation problems, see section 3.1.F. D. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC), or the FISA court, as it is popularly called (after the Act that created it), is composed of eleven federal judges, selected by the Chief Justice to a nonrenewable seven-year term. The court’s job is to review applications for governmental surveillance of persons within the United States whom the government suspects of having connections to foreign governments and/or terrorist organizations. A Foreign Intelligence Court of Review was also established to review applications denied by the FISA court. 53 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 3.6    § 3.6 Article I Courts Congress has created many tribunals to assist it in meeting its legislative responsibilities under Article I of the Constitution. These courts do not exercise judicial power conferred by Article III, and the judges are appointed for fixed terms rather than given life tenure. They include the many administrative law judges serving in the executive agencies who hear disputes over claims and benefits, subject to review by agency officials. A. U.S. Tax Court The U.S. Tax Court has jurisdiction over controversies involving deficiencies determined by the commissioner of internal revenue in income, estate, and gift taxes, as well as other tax-related disputes between taxpayers and the Internal Revenue Service. The principal office of the court is located in Washington, D.C., and it conducts trial sessions in other cities throughout the United States. B. U.S. Court of Federal Claims The U.S. Court of Federal Claims was originally called the U.S. Claims Court. The court has jurisdiction over claims brought against the U.S. government. The court is located in Washington, D.C.; however, its jurisdiction is nationwide, enabling it to conduct trials in locations convenient to the parties involved in the case. C. U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces Congress established the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces as an appellate criminal court, hearing all cases involving military courts-martial. It is located in Washington, D.C. D. U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has exclusive jurisdiction to review the decisions of the Board of Veterans Appeals. The court’s principal location is in Washington, D.C., but it may hold court anywhere in the United States. 54 fjc.dcn • fjc.gov 4 Chambers and Case Management    § 4.1 Chambers Administration This chapter gives you a broad overview of some of your responsibilities as a law clerk in maintaining a well-run chambers. These responsibilities include helping to ensure chambers security; answering telephones and mail; maintaining the judge’s motion, hearing, and trial calendars; and other miscellaneous matters. Discussing all such duties would, of course, be impossible, and some judges have chambers manuals detailing how they expect their chambers to operate. Understanding and accommodating your judge’s preferences is key to maintaining an efficient chambers, and regardless of the general guidance offered in this chapter, you should always follow the particular policies and practices of your judge. Effective management is essential to the efficient administration of justice. While judicial assistants often have principal responsibility for managing various aspects of chambers administration, as a law clerk you should be familiar with the standard operating procedures in your chambers and be available to pitch in when needed. A. Security The safety and security of federal buildings and the people who work in and visit them are major concerns for the U.S. Marshals Service (USMS). Attorneys and other members of the public must pass through magnetometers and have their briefcases and other items screened by an X-ray machine to enter most courthouses and other federal buildings. In addition, all judges’ chambers are equipped 55 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.1.A with an entry control system that consists of a security camera and monitor and a door release strike. Courthouse employees may be issued keycards enabling them to enter the courthouse without passing through metal detectors and to access secured, nonpublic sectors of the building, including judges’ chambers, depending on the individual court’s access-control security plans. Employees may also have after-hours and weekend access to the building through use of these keycards, which should be kept in a secure place and reported immediately if lost. All courthouse employees should carefully follow security procedures and report potential problems to the USMS. The U.S. Marshals Service is principally responsible for security of the court and its personnel, though most courthouse security functions are performed by court security officers (CSOs), who are funded by the judiciary’s Court Security Program and by the Federal Protective Service on a limited basis. Become familiar with the court’s Occupant Emergency Plan and other related USMS security plans in your courthouse, and help to maintain a secure chambers. Do not let unauthorized strangers into secure areas of the courthouse, and report suspicious mail or threatening phone calls. During security-sensitive proceedings, a judge may request that a deputy from the U.S. Marshals Service or a CSO be present in the courtroom. Because federal judges are occasionally the targets of terrorists or disgruntled litigants, be careful when opening mail. Mail received in the courthouse is routinely screened by the USMS before distribution to chambers and offices. Still, it pays to be alert to suspicious-looking items. Common recognition points for letter and package bombs include the following: • foreign mail, air mail, and special delivery • restrictive markings (e.g., confidential, personal) • excessive postage • handwritten or poorly typed addresses • incorrect titles • titles, but no names • misspelled common words • oily stains or discolorations • no return addresses • rigid envelopes • lopsided or uneven envelopes 56 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.1.C • protruding wires or tinfoil • excessive securing material such as masking tape or string • drawings, diagrams, or illustrations If a letter or package arouses attention, do not attempt to open it. Instead, immediately notify the marshals’ office or a CSO. B. Telephone Practices for dealing with incoming calls (e.g., how to answer the telephone, how to take messages, and when and if to transfer a call to the judge) will vary from chambers to chambers. In general, however, answer calls promptly, identify the office (e.g., “Judge Smith’s chambers”), and treat all callers courteously. And, of course, hold personal calls to a minimum, both in length and in number. See section 2.2.A.1 on communication with the media. C. Correspondence, Email, and Other Mail In addition to correspondence by U.S. postal and messenger service, many chambers now correspond by email with a wide variety of people, including counsel. While email has in some ways made communicating easier and more efficient, it has also made it even more important to stay on top of organizing and processing the mail. Email also presents serious potential problems relating to the accidental forwarding of messages, either to unintended parties or containing information not intended for the recipient. And bear in mind how easily emails can be broadly disseminated through forwarding and posting on websites and social media. Take special care to avoid sending and forwarding email messages that may result in embarrassment, a breach of confidence, or worse, and review and carefully proofread any outgoing messages (and fight the temptation not to proofread email as carefully as paper correspondence). Most chambers have practices and procedures for handling incoming and outgoing mail, including email (whether and when to delete email messages, how to store important messages for future reference, and other matters of email retention and organization). Quickly become familiar with these practices to help mitigate complications arising from the enormous number of emails that many chambers receive. Depending on office procedure, either a judicial assistant or a law clerk will open and review correspondence and make an initial decision concerning how 57 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.1.C it should be handled. Many judges receive their own emails directly, though some may ask staff to review messages first. Incoming mail and emails should be reviewed as soon as they are received because they may relate to matters scheduled for that day. When correspondence referring to a pending suit is forwarded to any counsel of record over the signature of the judge, law clerk, or judicial assistant, copies should be sent to all other counsel of record to avoid inappropriate ex parte contact. Appellate judges seldom correspond directly with counsel on case-related matters, because appellate judges work on cases as part of a panel or court rather than individually. Instead, appellate judges will send instructions to the clerk of court on how to respond to counsel. Correspondence from the general public that is not related to a case is still important because citizens have a right to courteous treatment. Also, the public’s opinions about the fairness, responsiveness, and effectiveness of the judiciary are influenced by the promptness and appropriateness of the court’s answers. In the district court, some of the correspondence from the public involves requests to be excused from jury service. That subject is dealt with in section 4.3.D.2. Some correspondence contains character references on behalf of an offender who is scheduled for sentencing. Judges differ in their handling of such correspondence. Many simply acknowledge receipt of the letter and refer the letter to the probation office. Other correspondence from the public may express reactions to a judge’s ruling. Whether positive or negative, expressions of opinion by members of the public generally call only for courteous acknowledgment, not for an explanation or justification of the judge’s action. If a letter requests information about a ruling, many judges simply acknowledge receipt of the letter and send a copy of the opinion, if there is one. If more information is requested, many judges refer the writer to the record in the clerk of court’s office. Some judges may wish to respond to a letter that indicates a misunderstanding concerning a significant fact, proceeding, or legal conclusion. Judges who adopt this policy may ask law clerks to prepare a draft of a response for the judge to review. The response should not be argumentative or defensive; it should merely state the relevant facts or legal conclusion as necessary to alleviate the misunderstanding. Prisoners and persons who have been convicted and are awaiting sentence frequently write district and appellate judges. Handle the correspondence of a prisoner represented by counsel the same way as that of any other litigant. Ask your judge how to handle correspondence from prisoners who are proceeding pro se. In some instances, this correspondence may be handled by district court pro se law clerks or, in the appellate courts, either the clerk’s office or staff attor58 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.1.D ney’s office. In other instances, your judge may have a form letter explaining, for example, that federal law prohibits judges from giving legal advice and suggesting that the prisoner communicate with a lawyer, or a form letter for responding to requests for transfers to another penal institution (which only the Bureau of Prisons can grant). You should never write anything in a letter that would give a prisoner false hope or could compromise the position of the court. D. Internet and Electronic Research New law clerks will receive a Westlaw and/or a LexisNexis password, which may come with additional electronic research training and certain usage guidelines. All computer-assisted legal research (CALR) use via judiciary contracts is to be limited to official judiciary-related research purposes. In addition to these research services, the Internet also offers more informal avenues of research, including access to nearly every newspaper and magazine in the country, as well as to government and law school websites, Internet search engines, and myriad other sources. Contact the circuit library CALR coordinator for assistance with CALR access or training. The CALR coordinators and reference librarians are also available to assist with your research questions. Become familiar with fjc.dcn (http://fjc.dcn), the Federal Judicial Center’s site on the judiciary’s intranet. It provides access to manuals, monographs, desk references, and other publications, as well as to web-based training and orientation programs, streaming media programs, discussion forums, and other resources. JNet (http://jnet.ao.dcn), the intranet site maintained by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, offers information and forms on a range of topics relevant to judicial employees, including benefits, court security, emergency preparedness, human resources, information technology, legal and general research, and travel. The Internet has also posed some serious security and usage challenges for employees and information technology departments in courthouses across the country. The judiciary provides you with a computer and Internet access to help you do your work. Depending on the policy in your court or chambers, you may use it on a limited basis for personal needs if doing so does not interfere with your work and does not cause congestion, delay, or disruption of service to any government system. You should not do anything on your office computer that would embarrass you or the court if it were made public. 59 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.1.E E. Electronic Filing The federal judiciary’s Case Management/Electronic Case Filing (CM/ECF) system allows courts to maintain case documents in electronic form and provides enhanced and updated docket management services. It also gives each court the option to permit case documents—pleadings, motions, petitions—to be filed electronically with the court. CM/ECF uses an Internet connection and a browser and accepts documents in Portable Document Format (PDF). It is easy to use. Filers prepare documents using conventional word-processing software and save them as PDF files. After logging on to the court’s website with a court-issued password, the filer enters basic information about the case and document being filed, attaches the document, and submits it to the court. CM/ECF automatically generates a notice verifying that the court received the filing, and it also sends an email to other parties in the case notifying them of the filing. There are no added fees for filing documents using CM/ECF, but existing document filing fees do apply. Litigants receive one free copy of documents filed electronically in their cases, which they can save or print for their files. Public electronic access to court data is available through the Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER) program. Additional copies are available for a small fee to attorneys and the general public for viewing or downloading. The process for receiving and reviewing daily filings in the cases filed before the judge may vary among courts and chambers; you should quickly learn the process in your chambers and your role in implementing and maintaining it. Although familiarity with the workings of the system is helpful, you should refer counsel’s questions to docketing clerks or others in the clerk’s office who deal with the system on a daily basis. F. Judge’s Chambers Calendar The judicial assistant is usually in charge of maintaining the chambers calendar covering the judge’s scheduled court proceedings and other activities. If the calendar is maintained online, other staff on the chambers network may also have limited access to the judge’s schedule. In appellate courts, the clerk of court advises the judge of panel assignments and hearing dates. The judicial assistant, in consultation with the judge, will then schedule all other engagements and commitments around the hearings. In trial courts, the judicial assistant usually confers with the judge and then typically advises the courtroom deputy in charge of scheduling the court calendar of the dates on which trials and hearings are to 60 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.1.H be set. The judicial assistant then schedules the judge’s remaining commitments around the trials and hearings. Some judges choose not to have a judicial assistant, which allows them to have an additional law clerk. In these instances, a law clerk may maintain the chambers calendar. G. Opening Court In district courts, a law clerk or courtroom deputy usually opens court. One common method is for the clerk or deputy to rap on the door before the judge enters, open the door, then call out, “All rise.” The judge then enters and walks to the bench. The law clerk or deputy walks to the front of the bench and says: “The United States District Court for the ____ District of ____ is now in session. The Honorable ______ presiding.” The judge usually stands during this call, then says, “Please be seated,” and sits. H. Maintaining the Library; Office Supplies, Equipment, and Furniture Many chambers maintain their own libraries, though electronic databases and Internet research reduce the need for access to hard-copy sources and have enabled chambers in the same courthouse to share libraries. In any event, the employee who maintains the library, either a law clerk or a judicial assistant, should regularly file any advance sheets, pocket parts, slip opinions, replacement volumes, and inserts for loose-leaf services that arrive in the mail. File materials daily so that library maintenance does not become burdensome and the materials are current. Procurement and ordering of all law books is done by the circuit library; contact the librarian if you have questions. Promptly rubber-stamp every incoming library book to identify it as U.S. property. Keep track of books borrowed by attorneys for courtroom use and make sure that books are not taken outside the chambers and courtroom. Promptly reshelve books used during the course of research. They will then be easier to find, and the library will be neater. Also be sure that legal pads, book markers, pencils, and pens are always available in the library. Requests for supplies, equipment, and furniture ordinarily are handled in the clerk of court’s office. 61 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.1.I I. Maintaining Office Records and Files You may have to maintain some of the records in your judge’s office, including the following: • case files • trial schedules or calendars • “tickler” records to remind the judge about future case activities • indices to the judge’s prior decisions • indices to slip opinions • work papers relating to cases in progress Such materials may be stored in hard copy, electronically, or both. Some chambers may also maintain office form books, either in hard copy or electronically. The form books may contain office procedure checklists and frequently used forms, such as samples of letters, orders, opinions, jury charges, minute entries, and office or file memoranda written by prior law clerks. The books describe the format and method for written documents issued by the judge or presented to the judge by chambers staff. The form books provide continuity and consistency in office administration and can help educate new law clerks. If case records are being used in the judge’s chambers, make sure that the records are not misplaced and are returned to the office of the clerk of court as soon as the judge or staff member has finished with them. J. Statistical Reporting The JS-10 form, “Monthly Report of Trials and Other Court Activity,” is a report of the trials and nontrial proceedings that a district judge conducted during the month. The clerk of the district court submits a JS-10 form to the Administrative Office for each active or senior district judge, plus any visiting district judges or appellate judges, who conducted trials or proceedings in the district during the month. The form reports both the number and type of trials and proceedings and the amount of time the judge spent conducting them. Some judges fill out the forms themselves, but usually a member of the chambers staff or the courtroom deputy fills out the form for the judge. The CM/ECF systems in some courts can automatically generate the JS-10 reports based on additional information about the trials and proceedings entered during the normal docketing process. Data on magistrate judge workloads and activities are collected through the MJSTAR 62 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.1.L function in district CM/ECF systems, which stores that data in the NewStats database. This includes not only the number of tasks completed by magistrate judges, but the time burden of many of these duties, including time spent with attorneys and parties. Bankruptcy courts report trials and other court activity on a monthly basis using the B-102 form. Courts of appeals use the JS-30 form to report the number of appellate cases, interlocutory appeals, and petitions for rehearing each month. K. Out-of-Town Trips Some judges must travel to other cities to attend court sessions and may require a chambers staff member to travel with them if the court to which they are traveling does not provide staffing. Judges may also travel on court-related business. Judicial assistants usually arrange travel (although when the judge has chosen to have an additional law clerk in lieu of a judicial assistant, a law clerk may have to make travel arrangements). If your judge is traveling to hold court in another location, prepare for the judge to take along necessary case files and materials; any personal notes or memoranda relating to the cases to be heard; the judge’s robe; paper, pencils, stationery, and other needed supplies (if the site for the out-of-town session is one frequently used by the court, there may be a permanent stock of stationery and supplies); necessary equipment such as a gavel, recording or dictating equipment, and a laptop or tablet computer; the briefs and any other case materials; and mailing labels and envelopes for returning material that the judge does not wish to carry back. Judges and chambers staff who travel on court business will be reimbursed for transportation, food, lodging, and related expenses according to the detailed rules set forth in the Guide to Judiciary Policy. These rules generally reimburse either a flat dollar amount per day, regardless of actual expenses, or itemized actual expenses not in excess of a fixed dollar amount. The judicial assistant should have forms for travel reimbursement—these forms can also be found on JNet. Judges must also report travel not related to cases under regulations found in Volume 19, section 270, of the Guide to Judiciary Policy. L. Assisting with Judges’ Extrajudicial Activities Many judges engage in teaching, writing, lecturing, and other extrajudicial activities. While law clerks may be called on to assist judges in these activities, the Code of Conduct for United States Judges says that judges should not use staff “to any 63 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.1.M substantial degree” to engage in extrajudicial activities to improve the law, the legal system, and the administration of justice; and judges should not use staff to engage in other extrajudicial activities, “except for uses that are de minimis.” M. Preserving Chambers Papers for Historical Purposes The chambers papers of a district or appellate court judge have historical significance as an essential supplement to the official court record. Many papers in judges’ chambers are widely considered valuable, such as correspondence and background material concerning a case, including memoranda between judges and law clerks and judges on an appeals panel; drafts of orders and opinions (particularly draft opinions that have handwritten comments on them, or that have been circulated to other judges and returned with their comments); and correspondence/memoranda concerning court administration, legal activities in the community, and issues of governance, politics, and law. Chambers papers are the personal property of the judge. Each judge has the prerogative to make final decisions about the preservation of chambers papers and the terms of access. Judges can preserve their personal papers and make them available for eventual study by donating them to a manuscript repository. An FJC publication, A Guide to the Preservation of Federal Judges’ Papers (3d ed. 2018), reviews the organization and preservation of historically significant records created by federal judges. The Federal Judicial History Office at the FJC will also provide assistance on issues concerning judges’ papers. N. Rules Regarding the Media in Court Guidelines for allowing cameras and electronic reproduction equipment in the courtroom are published in Volume 10 of the Guide to Judiciary Policy. The guidelines allow the photographing, recording, or broadcasting of appellate arguments. In trial courts, a presiding judge may authorize broadcasting, televising, recording, or taking photographs in the courtroom during ceremonial proceedings. For nonceremonial proceedings, such activities may be allowed for presenting evidence, perpetuating a record of the proceedings, and for security or judicial administration purposes. Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 53 prohibits photographing and radio broadcasting of criminal proceedings. Some circuit judicial councils have adopted specific instructions for the use of cameras in the courtroom. Although local rules restrict the means by which news may be reported (e.g., no cameras or broadcasting from the trial courtroom 64 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.2 or environs), “there is nothing that proscribes the press from reporting events that transpire in the courtroom.”    § 4.2Local Court Rules and Administrative Policies Section 2071 of Title 28 of the U.S. Code authorizes federal courts to adopt their own rules, which must be consistent with the national rules and available to the public; it also authorizes the circuit judicial council to abrogate district and bankruptcy courts’ local rules, and authorizes the Judicial Conference to abrogate rules of courts of appeals. Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure 47, Bankruptcy Procedure 9029, Civil Procedure 83, and Criminal Procedure 57 provide additional requirements for local rule adoption and characteristics. The local rules of almost all courts follow the same numbering sequence as the corresponding national rules. These local rules include the procedures for setting cases for trial, scheduling pretrial conferences, setting motions for oral argument, serving memoranda of law, and other details relating to trial. They may also state the procedure for admission of attorneys to practice in the specific district or circuit, the term of the court, the functions of the clerk of court, the rules for filing motions, and more specific data, such as the number of copies required to be filed, limitations on the length of memoranda, the time within which memoranda must be filed, and restrictions on page length, typeface, and margin size. Each court of appeals has local rules concerning procedures for ordering transcripts; filing and docketing the appeal; calendaring; motions; summary disposition of appeals; setting cases for oral argument; time limits on oral argument; petitions for rehearing; petitions for en banc consideration; and stay of mandate. The local rules and internal operating procedures of the courts of appeals are printed in the United States Code Annotated following Title 28 of the Judicial Code, and are available on the courts’ websites. A court’s local rules and any internal operating procedures it adopts establish specific procedures for the court and litigants to follow. You should get these rules and procedures from the court’s website or the clerk’s office and become familiar with them. Keep them available for reference and be on the lookout for any modifications the court may adopt. 65 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.3    § 4.3 Case Management: The Trial Court Many judges believe that the responsibility for moving a case through the trial court is not solely that of the attorneys, and the function of the court is not simply to be available if and when counsel want a hearing. The disposition of all cases as speedily and economically as is consistent with justice is paramount. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure are to be “construed to secure the just, speedy, and inexpensive determination of every action.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 1. The courts are also required to report semiannually (on April 30 and September 30) for each judge the motions that have been pending and the bench trials that have been submitted for more than six months, and cases that have not been terminated within three years of filing, for publication by the Administrative Office. 28 U.S.C. § 476. Effective docket control means that, early in a case, the judge assumes responsibility for guiding the case to a conclusion. This may include establishing deadlines for filing motions, a time limit for discovery, a date for counsel to take the next step in its prosecution, and a trial date. For specific techniques of case management, consult the Civil Litigation Management Manual. See also Schwarzer & Hirsch, The Elements of Case Management (Federal Judicial Center, 3d ed. 2017). Note that many of the same considerations apply in criminal cases, with the additional complication of computations required by the Speedy Trial Act. 18 U.S.C. §§ 3161–3174. Law clerks should be familiar with the requirements of the Act, since failure to bring a case to trial within the Act’s time limits can have serious repercussions. A. Office Status Sheets Some judges maintain an office status sheet and post it where it is accessible to chambers staff. Its purpose is to keep the judge, the law clerks, and judicial assistants apprised of legal matters under advisement and awaiting disposition. When a matter has been taken under advisement, the assistant or law clerk assigned to the case should indicate it on the status sheet. Keep a personal status list, which can be revised each week, listing all matters for which you are responsible. It will help you make effective use of your time and remember all pending assignments. Some judges require their law clerks to submit personal status lists weekly. Some judges require their judicial assistants to keep a list of all pending matters, the initials or name of the law clerk assigned to work on the matter, and 66 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.3.C any other pertinent information. If so, keep the assistant advised of all matters assigned, matters completed, and other relevant status information. CM/ECF helps judges use computer technology for docket control and to maintain case inventories and case-status records. Other systems may also be employed. Regardless of which system is used, it is important that it be regularly maintained and continually monitored. B. Calendaring Systems Multijudge trial courts need a system for determining which judge is responsible for each case. In an individual calendar system, each case is randomly assigned to a particular judge at the time it is filed, or soon thereafter, and that judge has complete responsibility for the case until it is terminated. There are also standard procedures for reassigning cases from which the original judge is disqualified, for ensuring that related cases are all assigned to the same judge, and for special assignment of unusual and protracted cases. Local rules usually describe these procedures. C. Trial Scheduling A single trial may be set for a specific date, or the court may set multiple cases for trial on the same day. Some courts use the trailing calendar or trailing docket, in which the court schedules a number of cases for trial beginning on a stated date. The cases are tried in the order reflected by the schedule. Counsel must obtain information from the court and from the attorneys whose cases precede them on the calendar about the progress of those cases, so that they can go to trial whenever the court reaches their case. Most civil cases do not go to trial but are disposed of in some other manner, including dispositive motions and settlement. Judges differ in their approach to encouraging settlement, but the decision whether to settle or proceed to trial is the parties’ alone. If settlement is to be reached, negotiations should be completed in a timely manner. Last-minute settlements may disrupt the court’s schedule, leaving the judges, and sometimes jurors, with unscheduled time. The trailing calendar and other multiple-case-setting devices alleviate some problems caused by last-minute settlement by providing substitute cases to replace those that do not go to trial. Although this resolves the court’s problems, it does not resolve the problems that eve-of-trial settlements cause litigants and counsel. 67 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.3.D Criminal cases take priority on the court’s calendar because they must be tried within the time limits set forth in the Speedy Trial Act. While criminal cases do not settle, the vast majority of them are disposed of by way of plea bargaining and guilty pleas, which again make multiple-case-setting an important calendaring device for the court. D. Jury Management 1. Random Juror Selection The selection of grand and petit jurors in both criminal and civil cases is governed by 28 U.S.C. §§ 1861–1878, under which each district must have a jury selection plan that has been approved by a panel comprising the circuit judicial council and the chief district judge or the chief judge’s designee. The statutory goal of the selection process is to ensure “grand and petit juries selected at random from a fair cross section of the community in the district or division wherein the court convenes” (28 U.S.C. § 1861), and to avoid excluding any citizen “from service as a grand or petit juror . . . on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or economic status” (28 U.S.C. § 1862). The clerk of court usually manages the process of selecting prospective jurors, under the supervision and control of the court. Although the jury selection process may differ slightly in each district, it is generally as follows: 1. The clerk’s office performs a random selection of prospective jurors’ names by computer or manually, using voter registration lists or other sources specified by the court’s plan, and places the names selected in a master jury wheel, which is usually a computer file. The minimum number of names in the master jury wheel must be one-half of 1% of the number on the source lists, or 1,000, whichever is less. 2. As needed by the court, the clerk’s office draws names publicly at random from the master jury wheel and sends jury-qualification questionnaires to those persons whose names are drawn. 3. From the responses to the questionnaires, a determination is made as to which persons are qualified for jury service and which persons are disqualified, exempt, or excused. 4. The names of those determined to be qualified are placed in a second jury wheel consisting of qualified jurors. 5. As needed, the clerk’s office selects names from the qualified jury wheel and prepares lists of the names selected. 68 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.3.D.2 6. The clerk’s office issues summonses to the necessary number of persons needed for the jury venire several weeks in advance of each trial calendar advising those summoned of the time and place to report for jury service. Some district courts qualify and summons jurors in one step and do not establish a qualified jury wheel. 2. Exemptions, Disqualifications, and Excuses A person is qualified for jury service unless the person • is not a citizen of the United States • is unable to read, write, and understand English with a degree of proficiency sufficient to complete the juror-qualification form satisfactorily • is incapable of rendering satisfactory service because of mental or physical infirmity • is charged with or has been convicted in a state or federal court of record of a crime punishable by imprisonment for more than one year without subsequent restoration of civil rights 28 U.S.C. § 1865. Some district courts have adopted other grounds for exemptions, which are specified in the court’s jury selection plan. Section 1863 of Title 18 requires the plan to provide for the exemption of members of the armed forces in active service; members of state or local fire or police departments; and public officers of the federal, state, and local governments who are actively engaged in the performance of official duties. Jury service is a citizen’s duty as well as a privilege, and courts do not readily grant excuses. A person may, however, be excused from jury service temporarily if the plan states that such service would result in undue hardship or extreme inconvenience. In such a case, the name of an excused juror is placed back in the qualified jury wheel. If a prospective juror approaches you about an excuse, do not express any opinion regarding the request, but simply refer the requester to the clerk’s office or jury administrator for action. Treat persons called for jury service with courtesy; they are providing an important service to the court and the public. Judges in multijudge courthouses often begin jury trials at different hours to obtain maximum use of people summoned for jury service, sending persons examined and not selected to another courtroom so they can be examined for 69 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.3.D.3 selection on another jury, and sometimes using jurors who have served in one trial in a succeeding trial. When prospective jury panels report for possible selection in a case, they should be segregated from other people in the courtroom. Law clerks may be responsible for clearing a portion of the spectator section for the jury panel’s exclusive use. 3. Juror Orientation Most courts conduct a juror orientation program to inform jurors of their responsibilities and to explain the trial process. Orientation videos, including the Federal Judicial Center’s Called to Serve, are available in most courts. 4. Voir Dire In most courts, the judge personally conducts voir dire examination. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 47 and Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 24, however, authorize the judge to permit the lawyers to conduct voir dire. If the judge conducts voir dire, the rules authorize counsel to submit specific questions or areas of inquiry that they want the judge to probe. In some courts, magistrate judges conduct voir dire. The law in most circuits permits this in civil cases, though some require consent of the parties. The Supreme Court has held that a magistrate judge may conduct voir dire in a criminal case if the defendant consents (Peretz v. United States, 501 U.S. 923 (1991)), but not if the defendant objects (Gomez v. United States, 490 U.S. 858 (1989)). 5. Jury Supervision In most courts, a deputy clerk is responsible for jury supervision. However, sometimes law clerks have this responsibility. If so, you should be present early enough in the morning to accommodate those members of the jury who arrive before the normal court time. The jury room should be open and available for use by the jurors as they arrive. If the judge permits the jury to take notes, either you or the deputy clerk should provide pads of paper and pencils for distribution to the jurors before the trial begins. Extra pads and pencils should also be placed in the jury room for use during deliberations. If you are responsible for jury supervision, ensure that there is no communication—in the courtroom, jury room, or hallways adjacent to the courtroom and chambers—between jurors and litigants, lawyers, witnesses, or others attending court. 70 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.3.E Jurors are usually free to go where they wish during recesses, and they may go home at night. Occasionally, however, when there is unusual publicity about the trial or there is reason to believe that someone will attempt to exert improper influence on jurors, the judge may direct that the jury be sequestered. When this occurs, deputy marshals keep the jurors together at all times and supervise them when court is not in session. Jurors in criminal and civil cases are sometimes sequestered from the time they begin deliberating until they reach a verdict. Judges sometimes have law clerks steward the jury during deliberations. Some judges require the law clerk to take a special oath with respect to this duty just before the jury retires. Once the oath is taken, the law clerk assumes primary responsibility for guarding the jury until relieved of this duty by the judge. Remain outside the jury-room door during the entire deliberation process and take every reasonable precaution to ensure that the jurors do not come into contact with other people, especially the litigants, their attorneys, or witnesses. You must never comment on the evidence, the litigants, the attorneys, or the witnesses to any juror (or, for that matter, to anyone else). If a juror has any questions about the trial, at any stage, you should simply state that such questions should be addressed to the judge in writing. Do not answer the question, however simple it may appear. E. Distributing Opinions Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 52(a) requires the judge to make findings of fact and conclusions of law in all actions tried without a jury or with only an advisory jury. The rule permits the judge to do this orally on the record or in writing in an opinion or memorandum. The judge may also write a formal opinion to explain rulings on particular motions. The judicial assistant sends the original of the findings or the opinion and the original of any order for judgment to the docket clerk for filing in the official record. Then the judicial assistant or clerk of court sends a copy of each set of findings or the opinion to each counsel of record, making and distributing other copies in accordance with the judge’s instructions. In most district courts, the clerk of court handles the distribution of opinions, but in a few district courts, this responsibility falls to the law clerk or judicial assistant. The judge decides whether the opinion or findings are to be published. If you are responsible for distributing opinions, check with the judge to determine whether the judge wishes the opinion to be published and make such distribution as the judge directs. In each case, the opinion should be accompanied by a cover letter from the judge; the judge may have a form letter for this purpose. 71 Law Clerk Handbook Federal Judicial Center § 4.4    § 4.4 Special Duties of Law Clerks to Bankruptcy Judges The duties of law clerks to bankruptcy judges are generally similar to the duties of those working for district judges. The volume of cases and proceedings in bankruptcy court is generally greater than in other trial courts, and the chambers must be organized to handle this volume effectively. Bankruptcy judges hold more, and faster, hearings than do district judges. For the chambers staff, that means more scheduling problems, more substantial prehearing preparation of memoranda, and shorter time limits. It also means more pressure from attorneys telephoning to ask for expedited schedules and to ask about procedures, the disposition of motions, and various other matters. Like district judges, bankruptcy judges differ in their attitudes about direct contact between law clerks and attorneys. Some bankruptcy judges hold court in more than one place. Law clerks and judicial assistants to those judges usually have substantial duties in preparing for travel, including assembly of materials (such as appropriate portions of case records necessary for the trip). The judge’s staff will usually have extra duties in the additional places of holding court because the other staff available may not be as complete as in the home court.    § 4.5 U.S. Magistrate Judges The authority of magistrate judges derives primarily from the Federal Magistrates Act of 1968 and as amended numerous times since. 28 U.S.C. §§ 631–639. Significant Supreme Court cases interpreting the Act include Mathews v. Weber, 423 U.S. 261 (1976) (upholding magistrate judge authority to hear Social Security appeals on a report and recommendation basis); United States v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667 (1980) (upholding magistrate judge authority to conduct hearings on motions to suppress evidence in felony cases on a report and recommendation basis); Peretz v. United States, 501 U.S. 923 (1991) (upholding magistrate judge authority to conduct felony voir dire proceedings with the parties’ consent); and Roell v. Withrow, 538 U.S. 580 (2003) (holding that parties’ consent to disposition of a civil case by a magistrate judge under 28 U.S.C. § 636(c) could be inferred from the parties’ conduct during the case). A general outline of the duties performed by magistrate judges is described below. 72 Chambers and Case Management fjc.dcn • fjc.gov § 4.5.B A. Initial Proceedings in Criminal Cases Under 28  U.S.C. §  636(a), a magistrate judge may perform various duties and conduct proceedings in criminal cases, including the following: • accept criminal complaints • issue arrest warrants and summonses • issue search warrants • conduct initial appearance proceedings and detention for criminal defendants, informing them of the charges against them and of their rights • set bail or other conditions of release or detention under the Bail Reform Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 3141–3145 • appoint attorneys for defendants who are unable to afford or obtain counsel • hold preliminary examinations, or “probable cause” hearings • administer oaths and take bail, acknowledgments, affidavits, and depositions • conduct extradition proceedings 