If you have sleep apnea, not enough air can flow into your lungs
through your mouth and nose during sleep, even though breathing
efforts continue. When this happens, the amount of oxygen in your
blood decreases. Your brain responds by awakening you enough to
tighten the upper airway muscles and open your windpipe. Normal
breaths then start again, often with a loud snort or choking sound.
Although people who have sleep apnea typically snore loudly and
frequently, not everyone who snores has sleep apnea. 
Because people who have sleep apnea frequently go from deeper
sleep to lighter sleep during the night, they rarely spend enough time
in deep, restorative stages of sleep. They are therefore often excessively sleepy during the day. Such sleepiness is thought to lead to
mood and behavior problems, including depression, and it more
than triples the risk of being in a traffic or work-related accident.
The many brief drops in blood-oxygen levels that occur during the
night can result in morning headaches and trouble concentrating,
thinking clearly, learning, and remembering. Additionally, the
intermittent oxygen drops and reduced sleep quality together trigger
the release of stress hormones. These hormones raise your blood
pressure and heart rate and boost the risk of heart attack, stroke,
irregular heartbeats, and congestive heart failure. In addition,
untreated sleep apnea can lead to changes in energy metabolism (the
way your body changes food and oxygen into energy) that increase
the risk for developing obesity and diabetes.
Anyone can have sleep apnea. It is estimated that at least 12–18
million American adults have sleep apnea, making it as common as
asthma. More than one-half of the people who have sleep apnea are
overweight. Sleep apnea is more common in men. More than 1 in
25 middle-aged men and 1 in 50 middle-aged women have sleep
apnea along with extreme daytime sleepiness. About 3 percent of
children and 10 percent or more of people over age 65 have sleep
apnea. This condition occurs more frequently in African Americans,
Asians, Native Americans, and Hispanics than in Caucasians.
More than one-half of all people who have sleep apnea are not
diagnosed. People who have sleep apnea generally are not aware
that their breathing stops in the night. They just notice that they
don’t feel well rested when they wake up and are sleepy throughout
the day. Their bed partners are likely to notice, however, that they
snore loudly and frequently and that they
often stop breathing briefly while
sleeping. Doctors suspect sleep apnea
if these symptoms are present, but
the diagnosis must be confirmed
with overnight sleep monitoring.
This
monitoring will reveal pauses in
breathing, frequent sleep
arousals (changes from
sleep to wakefulness), and
intermittent drops in
levels of oxygen in
the blood.
Like adults who have sleep apnea, children who have this disorder
usually snore loudly, snort or gasp, and have brief pauses in breath
ing while sleeping. Small children often have enlarged tonsils and
adenoids that increase their risk for sleep apnea. But doctors may
not suspect sleep apnea in children because, instead of showing the
typical signs of sleepiness during the day, these children often
become agitated and may be considered hyperactive. The effects of
sleep apnea in children may include poor school performance and
difficult, aggressive behavior.
A number of factors can make a person susceptible to sleep apnea.
These factors include:
Throat muscles and tongue that relax more than normal while
asleep
Enlarged tonsils and adenoids
Being overweight—the excess fat tissue around your neck
makes it harder to keep the throat area open
Head and neck shape that creates a somewhat smaller airway
size in the mouth and throat area
Congestion, due to allergies, that also can narrow the airway
Family history of sleep apnea
If your doctor suspects that you have sleep apnea, you may be
referred to a sleep specialist. Some of the ways to help diagnose
sleep apnea include:
A medical history that includes asking you and your family
questions about how you sleep and how you function during
the day.
Checking your mouth, nose, and throat for extra or large
tissues—for example, checking the tonsils, uvula (the tissue
that hangs from the middle of the back of the mouth), and soft
palate (the roof of your mouth in the back of your throat).
An overnight recording of what happens with your breathing
during sleep (polysomnogram, or PSG).
A multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), usually done in a sleep
center, to see how quickly you fall asleep at times when you
would normally be awake. (Falling asleep in only a few
minutes usually means that you are very sleepy during the day.
Being very sleepy during the day can be a sign of sleep apnea.
Once all the tests are completed, the sleep specialist will review the
results and work with you and your family to develop a treatment
plan. Changes in daily activities or habits may help reduce your
symptoms:
Sleep on your side instead of on your back. Sleeping on your
side will help reduce the amount of upper airway collapse
during sleep.
Avoid alcohol, smoking, sleeping pills, herbal supplements,
and any other medications that make you sleepy. They make
it harder for your airways to stay open while you sleep, and
sedatives can make the breathing pauses longer and more
severe. Tobacco smoke irritates the airways and can help
trigger the intermittent collapse of the upper airway.
Lose weight if you are overweight. Even a little weight loss
can sometimes improve symptoms.
These changes may be all that are needed to treat mild sleep apnea.
However, if you have moderate or severe sleep apnea, you will need
additional, more direct treatment approaches.
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is the most effective
treatment for sleep apnea in adults. A CPAP machine uses mild air
pressure to keep your airways open while you sleep. The machine
delivers air to your airways through a specially designed nasal mask.
The mask does not breathe for you; the flow of air creates increased
pressure to keep the airways in your nose and mouth more open
while you sleep. The air pressure is adjusted so that it is just enough
to stop your airways from briefly becoming too small during sleep.
The pressure is constant and continuous. Sleep apnea will return if
CPAP is stopped or if it is used incorrectly.
People who have severe sleep apnea symptoms generally feel much
better once they begin treatment with CPAP. CPAP treatment can
cause side effects in some people. Possible side effects include dry or
stuffy nose, irritation of the skin on the face, bloating of the stom
ach, sore eyes, or headaches. If you have trouble with CPAP side
effects, work with your sleep specialist and support staff. Together,
you can do things to reduce or eliminate these problems.
Currently, no medications cure sleep apnea. However, some
prescription medications may help relieve the excessive sleepiness
that sometimes persists even with CPAP treatment of sleep apnea.
Another treatment approach that may help some people is the use of
a mouthpiece (oral or dental appliance). If you have mild sleep
apnea or do not have sleep apnea but snore very loudly, your doctor
or dentist also may recommend this. A custom-fitted plastic mouth
piece will be made by a dentist or an orthodontist (a specialist in
correcting teeth or jaw problems). The mouthpiece will adjust your
lower jaw and tongue to help keep the airway in your throat more
open while you are sleeping. Air can then flow more easily into your
lungs because there is less resistance to breathing. Following up
with the dentist or orthodontist is important to correct any side
effects and to be sure that your mouthpiece continues to fit properly.
It is also important to have a followup sleep study to see whether
your sleep apnea has improved.
Some people who have sleep apnea may benefit from surgery; this
depends on the findings of the evaluation by the sleep specialist.
Removing tonsils and adenoids that are blocking the airway is done
frequently, especially in children. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
(UPPP) is a surgery for adults that removes the tonsils, uvula, and
part of the soft palate. Tracheostomy is a surgery used rarely and
only in severe sleep apnea when no other treatments have been
successful. A small hole is made in the windpipe, and a tube is
inserted. Air will flow through the tube and into the lungs, bypass
ing the obstruction in the upper airway.
