AI for Cybersecurity 
Many attacks target relatively simple errors, such as misconfigurations of systems, that are hidden in a 
vast amount of correct data. Logic-based AI systems are exceptionally good at noticing these kinds of 
inconsistencies and knowing how to repair them. 
Other attacks may show up as departures from standard usage patterns. These patterns may not be 
obviously anomalous, can be hidden deep within data streams, and are unlikely to be visible to humans. 
Though often indescribable by humans, these patterns can be learned by machines and noticed at scale. 
It is understood that significant leverage is gained from having a small team of highly skilled cyber 
defenders protecting networks used by thousands. Using AI could enable similar levels of protection to 
become ubiquitous while providing the domain experience necessary to address other aspects, such as 
quality-of-service constraints and degradation-of-system behaviors.  
 
AI can also play a role in securely deploying and operating software systems. Once code is developed, AI 
techniques can automatically explore for low-level attack vectors, or where appropriate, domain and 
application configuration or logic errors. Similarly, AI can also advise IT professionals on best practices for 
the secure operation and monitoring of critical systems. Automated configuration advice can secure 
systems against unsophisticated adversaries, whereas AI-based network monitoring can detect patterns 
of attack that are associated with more sophisticated nation-state adversaries. 
Open-source software development offers a unique setting to apply these AI-based software assurance 
techniques. With its widespread use by commercial and government organizations, open-source security 
improvements would be extremely high impact (e.g., an automated system that continually proposes 
security patches for open source software). At the same time, the public nature of open source 
development adds new challenges concerning the malicious introduction of functionality and corruption 
of data by an AI-based agent. This requires further exploration. 
AI for Identity Management 
Identity management and access control are central to securing modern communication systems and data 
stores. However, an adversary can compromise many of these systems by stealing relatively small 
authorization tokens. AI-based identity management can make access-control decisions based on a 
history of interactions, and it is difficult to circumvent. By characterizing expected behavior, AI techniques 
can provide protection with more lightweight and transparent mechanisms than current approaches (e.g., 
two-person authorization requirements for certain actions). AI also can enhance accuracy and reduce 
threats against biometric authentication systems.  
However, there is a downside to using AI for identify management. AI monitoring of behavioral patterns 
to provide authorization and detect insider threats could enable ongoing privacy violations in the system. 
Research is needed to push monitoring and decision-making procedures closer to where they are needed, 
and to use techniques such as differential privacy to limit the scope of privacy violations. These efforts 
should include both the ethical and technical aspects of identity management and examine the potential 
for abuse. 

AI techniques are likely to be used by attackers as well as defenders. Traditional defensive strategy sought 
to eliminate vulnerabilities or to increase the costs of an attack. The use of AI could dramatically alter the 
attack risk and cost equations. Automated systems will need to plan for worst cases and anticipate, 
respond, and analyze potential and actual threat occurrences. Research is needed to understand how AI 
changes the attacker and defender balance of capabilities, and how it alters attack economics.  
There are multiple stakeholders involved in cyber defensive scenarios, including data owners, service 
providers, system operators, and those affected by AI-based decisions. How stakeholders are consulted 
and informed about autonomous operations and how decision-making is delegated and constrained are 
important considerations. 
Two areas of specific interest are autonomous attacks and mission-specific resilience.  
Autonomous Attacks 
Cyber defenders will face attacks created and orchestrated by AI systems. At the most basic level, where 
there is a stable cyber environment, attacks could be constructed using classic deterministic planning. At 
the next level, where the environment is uncertain, attacks may involve planning under uncertainty.  
In the extreme case where minimal information about the environment and defenses is available, the 
attacker could use autonomous techniques to discover information and learn how to attack and execute 
plans for cyber reconnaissance. The attacker’s challenges include the need to remain stealthy and avoid 
any deception mechanisms.  
The attacker may use AI to develop strategies that include building a model of the victim network or 
system (i.e., AI-enabled program synthesis). An adversary can systematically generate programs that have 
a fixed behavior to learn about a cybersecurity product—using it as an oracle. At a high level, the attacker 
can generate code examples and predict whether the defense technology would detect the attacker’s 
presence as malicious. Using the answers, the attacker can build a model of the cybersecurity product. 
Methods and techniques are needed to make deployed systems resistant to automated analysis and 
attack, by either increasing the cost or continuing to close system loopholes. One promising technique is 
automated isolation (e.g., behavioral restrictions). Attacks can exploit the universality of program 
execution because most software components are designed to have limited behavior. Sandboxes have 
proven effective in protecting software from memory corruption attacks, but more precise methods are 
needed. There is value in exploring AI systems that learn the scope of valid behaviors and limit 
components to those behaviors.  
Another method is to strategically study defensive agility. How and when should plans and systems be 
updated? Can results from simulation environments be applied to real systems? What are the principles 
behind simulating? What is possible, and what is useful? 
Mission-Specific Resilience 
Many cybersecurity techniques are designed to be broadly applicable. While often beneficial, applying 
techniques without accounting for the objectives of the enterprise can lead to problems, including failure 
to meet the mission (whether social, industrial, or military). Domain experts must team with the AI experts 
to categorize system attacks and model responses in the context of the primary mission of the 
organization. 

Conflict between security measures designed for distinct computing resources, whether they are run 
concurrently or in sequence, is a challenge. For example, one autonomous agent may be working to lay a 
cyber deception trail to confuse a cyber attacker while another agent may be trying to simplify the 
network structure to reduce the attack surface.  
Autonomous Cyber Defense 
As adversaries use AI to identify vulnerable systems, amplify points of attack, coordinate resources, and 
stage attacks at scale, defenders need to respond accordingly. 
Current practice is often focused on the detection of individual exploits, but sophisticated attacks can 
involve multiple stages—including penetration, lateral motion, privilege escalation, malware staging, 
and/or persistence establishment—before the ultimate target is compromised. Although modern ML 
techniques can detect the individual events that constitute this “cyber kill chain,” a bottom-up approach 
that sequentially addresses the various stages of attack is inadequate. Progress requires integration 
activity at the tactical level into a top-down strategic view that reveals the attacker’s goals and current 
status, and helps coordinate, focus, and manage available defensive resources. 
Consider the scenario of an attack on a power distribution system. Initial penetration is accomplished 
through a phishing email and the initial foothold is on a normal workstation. A larger malware package is 
downloaded that includes a key logger and a “kill disk” that consumes all the space on the workstation disk. 
The credentials of a system administrator who logs in to repair the workstation are exfiltrated to the 
attacker, and the attacker moves to the power grid’s operator console, able then to disable the entire 
distribution network. 