Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB) 
Given the increasing subscription to multiple clouds in many enterprises, one of the most 
important pieces of software is the cloud access security broker (CASB). It sits on the network 
between the cloud service customers (CSC) and the cloud service providers (CSP). The evolution 
of CASB functionality can be traced as follows [3]: 
• The primary function of the first generation of CASBs was the discovery of resources. 
They provided visibility into all of the cloud resources that the enterprise users accessed, 
thus preventing or minimizing the chances of shadow IT. Shadow IT is the practice of 
some users using cloud applications that are not authorized by the enterprise IT 
management from home or the office using enterprise desktops. An example of this is the 
use of unapproved software as-a-service (SaaS) applications for file sharing, social 
media, collaboration, and web conferencing [4]. This generation of CASBs also provides 
some statistics, such as software-as-a-service (SaaS) utilization. 
• The current generation of CASBs enforces security and governance policies for cloud 
applications, thus enabling enterprises to extend their on-premises policies to the cloud. 
Specific security services provided by CASBs include: 
o Protection of enterprise data that live in cloud service providers’ servers (due to 
SaaS or IaaS subscriptions), as well as data inflow and data outflow (i.e., Data 
Loss Prevention [DLP] capabilities) from those servers. 
o Tracking of threats, such as account hijacking and other malicious activities, some 
of which can detect anomalies in users’ cloud access behavior (through robust 
User and Entity Behavior Analytics (UEBA) functionality) and stop insider 
threats and advanced cyberattacks [5]. 
o Detection of misconfigurations in the enterprise’s subscribed IaaS and cloud 
servers. These misconfigurations pose serious security risks, such as data 
breaches. Alerts generated by CASB due to misconfigurations in the enterprise’s 
IaaS deployments direct the enterprise to follow guidelines, such as the Center for 
Internet Security’s (CIS) benchmarks for public cloud services, thus improving 
the overall security profile of the enterprise for cloud access [4]. 
Enhanced Firewall Capabilities 
The security functions in firewalls have enlarged alongside the changing network landscape. 
Firewalls started as hardware appliances that prevented network packets from a device with a 
particular network location (e.g., combination of Internet Protocol (IP) address and port) in one 
8 
NIST SP 800-215  
November 2022  
Guide to a Secure Enterprise  
Network Landscape 
subnet (e.g., external network or internet) from accessing a device on another network location 
or subnet (e.g., intranet or Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) or corporate network). In that setup, it 
primarily secured a network perimeter. The evolution of firewall functions can be traced based 
on the following feature sets [6]: 
• Packet filters and network address translation: Packet filtering and Network address 
translation (NAT) are used to monitor and control packets moving across a network 
interface, apply predetermined security rules, and obscure the internal network from the 
public internet.  
• Stateful inspection: Stateful firewalling, also known as dynamic packet filtering, monitors 
the state of connections and makes determinations as to what types of data packets belong 
to a known active connection and can be allowed to pass through the firewall.  
• Deep packet inspection (DPI): This feature, also known as packet sniffing, examines the 
content of packets (both the header and the payload, unlike the stateful inspection that 
inspects only the packet header). In addition to the capability provided by stateful 
inspection, this has capabilities related to finding hidden threats within the data stream, 
such as attempts at data exfiltration, violations of content policies, malware, and more. 
• Threat detection and response: Modern firewalls can gather and analyze enough data 
across multiple packets and sessions to detect threats and security incidents targeted at a 
particular system or a family of systems. These data from multiple firewalls can also be 
directed toward security information and event management (SIEM) and correlated with 
data from other security tools and IT systems to detect enterprise-wide attacks that span 
multiple systems and network layers. In addition, these data can be used to understand 
evolving threats and define new access rules, attack patterns, and defensive strategies [6].  
• Logging and auditing capabilities: Logging and auditing capabilities result in the 
construction of network events that can be used to identify patterns of performance and 
security issues.  
• Access control functions: Access control functions enforce granular sophisticated access 
control policies. 
• Multiple locations and functions: Firewalls reside at different locations to perform 
different functions. Firewalls at the network edge perform the network perimeter 
protection function by filtering disallowed sources and destinations and blocking the 
packets of potential threats. Firewalls inside a data center can segment the internal 
network to prevent the lateral movement of traffic and isolate sensitive resources (e.g., 
services and data stores). Device-based firewalls prevent malicious traffic in and out of 
endpoints. 
• Open Application Programming Interfaces (APIs): These enable integration with many 
networking products that provide additional security capabilities.  
• Policy Composition Capabilities: Some firewalls can have the capabilities to merge 
policies at enforcement time so as to ensure that consistent policies are applied to 
different classes of users (e.g., those on-premises and on private and public clouds).  
• Web application firewalls (WAF): This class of firewalls has been used ever since web 
applications accessed through web protocols, such as Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
9 
NIST SP 800-215  
November 2022  
Guide to a Secure Enterprise  
Network Landscape 
(HTTP), came into existence. A feature advancement in this class of firewalls is 
advanced Uniform Resource Locator (URL) filtering. This is the ability to detect traffic 
from malicious URLs and prevent web-based threats and attacks by receiving real-time 
data analyzed by machine learning algorithms [7][8]. Specifically, this class of firewalls 
can inspect threat vectors for SQL Injection, operating system (OS) command injections, 
and cross-site scripting attacks, as well as prevent inbound attacks. They are used in 
content delivery networks (CDN) and to prevent distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) 
attacks. Some additional features found in this class of firewalls are: 
a. Ability to specify an allowable list of services (control at the application level) 
b. Traffic matches the intent of allowed ports 
c. Filtering of some unwanted protocols 
Appliance-set with Integrated Functions 
• Unified threat management (or UTMs): UTM devices combine many of the most critical 
security functions – firewall, IPS, VPN concentrator, gateway antivirus, content filtering, 
and WAN load balancing – into a single device, usually with a unified management 
console.  
• Next-generation firewall (NGFW): The distinguishing feature of NGFW is application 
data awareness. It can look at data not only at layers 3 and 4 of an Open Systems 
Interconnection (OSI) stack but also at layer 7 – the application level. Its capabilities 
extend beyond packet filtering and stateful inspection. There are multiple deployment 
options available for NGFWs, such as an appliance in the data center, as a software 
running in a VM in a cloud, or as a cloud service (FWaaS). Some capabilities of NGFW 
include [9]:  
a. Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) 
b. TLS decryption and inspection of packet payload 
c. Intrusion prevention system (IPS) feature 
• Web application and API protection (WAAP): This is a comprehensive security approach 
and an enhancement over WAF. WAF is an integral component for API security, BOT 
(abbreviation for Robot) defense, and DDOS protection.  
a. These can be offered as a product suite or as a cloud-based service [10][11].  
b. Secure web gateway (SWGs): SWGs are appliances utilized for policy-based 
access to and control of cloud-based applications as well as governance of access 
to the open web for enterprise users in ubiquitous locations (e.g., headquarters, 
branch offices, home, remote locations). An SWG is fundamentally a web filter 
that protects outbound user traffic through HTTP or Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
Secure (HTTPS) inspection [12]. It also protects user endpoints from web-based 
threats that can occur when users click on links to malicious websites or to 
websites infected with malware. They centralize control, visibility, and reporting 
across many locations and types of users. They are not a replacement for WAFs, 
10 
NIST SP 800-215  
November 2022  
Network Security Automation Tools 
Guide to a Secure Enterprise  
Network Landscape 
which protect websites housed in enterprise data centers and large headquarter 
sites from inbound attacks.