What does it take?
A digital transformation requires five areas of competency:
Adopting new technology
A definitive feature of a digital transformation is that it involves the adoption of new software-based digital
capabilities or technology infrastructure. It’s not necessary that these use emergent technologies such as
Machine Learning, Augmented Reality, or Blockchain, so long as they support innovation, the creation of new
value to customers, or operational efficiencies.
Using data
With digital transformation comes an explosion in the data available about your products and target markets. That
means that collecting, analyzing, and using data to make good decisions is key. Being good at it can give you a
competitive advantage. Being bad is just the opposite. In an increasingly data-led competitive environment, new
strategies must be based on objective information where possible. As put in a 2017 article by The Economist [2],
“The world’s most valuable resource is no longer oil, but data.”
Customer focus
Understanding your customers is critical for any business and even more so when trying new ways of working
in new markets or business areas. These insights help you understand what can potentially increase customer
satisfaction and, ultimately, sales. As a business, it means having the capability to get deep customer insights,
experiment with ideas, and adapt and evolve your offering or business model in response. The mantra ‘constant
change’ applies to your markets, competitors and customers, and your business. Continually learning what your
customers care about (i.e., value) and where the market is heading must be embedded within your organization.
Cross-functional collaboration and processes
Today’s digital products are highly complex and involve many specialists to bring them to market, from skilled
software developers and designers to User eXperience (UX) experts, DevOps, and Product Managers. No one
individual has all the insights or skills necessary for success - a team of specialists working closely together is
needed. In many companies, you see organizational silos, which can make cross-functional teamwork hard. Empire
building and old-fashioned power hierarchies (founded on the human tendency for large egos to dominate) are
often the reason. In these silos, top-down decision making, known as command-and-control, is often the result.
However, this can exclude vital insights from other functions.
Building software products is a creative process, and diverse skills and viewpoints in the team drive better results.
Organization structures and processes that promote cross-functional working can bring out the best from all the
different specialisms and maximize the odds of success. Having everyone’s primary home as an autonomous team
(or squad) focused on a specific product/element is often held up as the ideal example of how to do this. However,
more often we see a product management department with Product Managers leading virtual teams who are
working on their product(s).
Capacity to change and adopt a digital mindset
Digital transformation requires fundamental changes within an organization, which go to the heart of its business
model, culture, and operations. Companies must be willing to take a risk by experimenting with new business
models and new ways of doing things. For example, incentivizing Sales to sell software rather than hardware
or changing the business case approach to see software products as an ongoing development rather than a
one-off project.
A good example is the car industry in Europe. Over the last couple of years, it has been trying to adopt this digital
mindset and move from the paradigm of a hardware-centric product (a one-off sale of a car) to a more softwarecentric approach. With continuous updates to the car’s software this opens up the potential for new additional
and ongoing revenue. This is possible only if the leadership and people in a company adopt a digital mindset.
It’s about thinking about digital as the default approach rather than a series of one-off transformation projects.