How Telescopes Are Like Eyes
Telescopes and eyes are both tools for collecting and detecting light. In fact,
telescopes can be thought of as bigger, more powerful eyes. Eyes have an opening
called the pupil where the light enters; a lens to focus the light; and a retina in the
back to detect the light. Telescopes also have an opening to let in light; a lens or
mirror to focus the light; and a detector to receive and process the light.
In the eye, chemical reactions in the retina convert light into electrical signals, w h i c h
are processed by the brain. In telescopes, several different kinds of light detectors are
used. Some telescopes contain electronic devices that convert light into electrical
signals that can be analyzed and stored by a computer. In other telescopes, the light
is focused onto photographic film, where the information is recorded as a photograph.
In simple backyard telescopes, the light is focused onto the eye of the person looking
through the telescope. In this case, the telescope’s light detector is a human eye.
When you look through a telescope, all of the light that enters eventually reaches the
back of your eye. Hundreds of times more light enters a small telescope than would
n o rmally enter your eye because the telescope’s opening (also known as its “apert u r e ” )
is much bigger than your pupil. The telescope’s lens or mirror focuses all of this light
so that it fits through your pupil. This is why telescopes let you see objects that do
not give off enough light to see by unaided eye alone. 
Telescopes have several advantages over eyes, including larger light-collecting areas;
collecting light for longer periods of time; and the ability to detect wavelengths of
light invisible to humans.
Larger Light-Collecting Areas
When you move from a bright area into darkness, the pupil in your eye can expand
from less than 1/1 6 inch to more than o inch in diameter — becoming sixteen times
greater in area —in order to take in more light. Telescopes offer a way to expand
the light-collecting area even further, in effect increasing the size of your pupil by
hundreds or thousands of times. A simple backyard telescope with a 4-inch-diameter
lens can capture 250 times more light than an eye with a o -inch-wide pupil, and
the Hubble Space Telescope’s 94.5-inch mirror captures 143,000 times as much light
as a o -inch pupil.
Telescopes that capture radio waves look nothing like optical telescopes, but the
surface area of the collector still determines how powerful the telescope is. Radio
telescopes collect light in “dishes” that resemble satellite TV antennas. The wider
the dish, the more powerful the telescope, because a wider dish can capture more
light. The radio telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico has a dish
1,000 feet wide
Collecting Light for Longer Periods of Time
The light detectors in telescopes can gather light from a single source over a long
period of time. In some cases, light collected over several hours is used to create a
single image. This is something the human eye cannot do. The cells in your retina
collect light for just a fraction of a second. Then they repeat the process, essentially
taking a new picture about twenty times a second. This enables your eye to keep
track of moving objects. If your eye did not constantly update its information about
where things are, moving objects would become a blur.
When collecting light from faint objects such as distant galaxies, however, a
twentieth of a second is not enough time for your eye to see anything at all, even if
you are looking through a large telescope. Astronomers solve this problem by
attaching special detectors to telescopes. This lets them point a telescope at a single
object for minutes or even hours and combine all the light the camera receives into a
single image. The resulting image reveals much more than a person could see with
their eyes, even looking through the same telescope.
In the past, telescope detectors used photographic film. Though some still use film,
most research telescopes now use electronic cameras that store digital images
on a computer.
The electronic light detectors used in telescopes are called charged-coupled devices,
or CCDs. CCD chips are made of thousands of tiny sensors that convert light into
an electrical signal. The amount of electricity that passes through a given spot on the
chip reveals how much light struck that point. Computers process the electrical
information to make a digital image. The same technology is used in photocopiers,
fax machines, video cameras, and bar code readers, all of which convert light signals
into electrical signals.
The Ability to Detect Wavelengths of Light Invisible to Humans
Many telescopes are built to detect wavelengths of light your eyes cannot. Light
from space comes in many wavelengths, most of which are invisible to the human
eye—including gamma rays, X rays, ultraviolet and infrared light, microwaves,
and radio waves. Whether visible or invisible, all light contains information about
its source. So astronomers use special telescopes to detect wavelengths of light
not visible to humans.
The hotter an object is, the shorter the wavelengths of light it gives off. Because stars
are so hot, much of the light they emit is in wavelengths too short for your eyes to
see. Pictures of the Sun taken in ultraviolet or X-ray light, for instance, show hot,
glowing jets of gas arching out of the Sun. These shapes are always there, but they
cannot be seen in visible wavelengths.
Telescopes sensitive to different wavelengths of light are useful in observing
different astronomical phenomena.
Gamma Ray Telescopes
Gamma rays have the shortest wavelength and contain the most energy of any form
of light. They are believed to come from highly energetic processes such as collisions
between two black holes, collisions between two neutron stars, or the collapse of
hyperstars—giant stars even bigger than the ones that cause supernovas.
The design of a gamma-ray telescope is unique in that the telescope itself is one big
detector without any lenses or mirrors. The wavelengths of gamma rays are so small
that they pass easily through conventional lenses or mirrors.
X-ray Telescopes
X-ray telescopes are used to observe extremely hot sources, such as the gases around
black holes. X-ray telescopes cannot focus X-ray light the same way that ordinary
telescopes do, because X-rays go right through most mirrors. Some X ray telescopes
have special mirrors shaped like long, narrow tubes. As X rays enter the tube, they
graze the mirror just enough to reflect gently toward a detector instead of passing
through the mirror. 
Ultraviolet Telescopes
Ultraviolet (UV) light has shorter wavelengths than visible light. These waves
come from very hot stars. Ultraviolet telescopes can also be used to observe the hot
gases surrounding the Sun. UV telescopes appear very similar in design to visible
light telescopes except they are equipped with specially designed detectors sensitive
to UV light.
Visible Light Telescopes
Optical telescopes capture the same kind of light your eyes can see. They reveal how
distant objects would look if we were closer to them. Most of the cosmic images we
see in magazines and newspapers come from visible light telescopes. Visible light is
also a good source of information about average-temperature stars like the Sun.
Infrared Telescopes
Infrared light has fairly long wavelengths that pass through clouds of dust better
than light with shorter wavelengths. Infrared telescopes are used to observe objects
surrounded by dust, such as young stars being born inside nebulae. Because all
warm objects give off infrared light, infrared telescopes are chilled so that they
won’t detect their own glow. The lifespan of an infrared telescope is limited by how
long the telescope can be kept cool. 
Microwave Telescopes
Microwaves are used to observe the afterglow of the Big Bang, the ancient explosion
that created the Universe. Microwave radiation also reveals the presence of many
small molecules, such as carbon monoxide. The design of microwave telescopes is
most similar to that of radio telescopes: large metallic “dishes” that collect and focus
the longer wavelengths of microwave light.
Radio Telescopes
Radio waves have long wavelengths, from a meter on up to over a kilometer.
Extremely large telescope dishes are required to capture these long wavelengths.
Radio telescopes can reveal details of distant galaxies and nebulae. Radio telescopes
helped astronomers discover “pulsars,” which are collapsed stars that rotate rapidly,
emitting pulses of radio waves like the rotating lights on a police car or a lighthouse. 