context block: Notification Requirements.—The Committee reminds the Department that the Committee uses the definitions for transfer, reprogramming, and program, project, and activity as defined by the 
Government Accountability Office (GAO). As noted in the fiscal 
year 2023 Joint Explanatory Statement, a program, project, or activity (PPA) is an element within a budget account. PPAs are identified by reference to include the most specific level of budget items 
identified in the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug 
Administration, and Related Agencies Act, 2023, accompanying 
Committee reports, explanatory statements, and budget justifications. The Committee notes that the most specific level of budget 
items in USDA budget justifications is not limited to tables titled 
‘‘Project Statement’’. 
PFAS.—The Committee notes that there are previously provided 
funds related to polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) which remain 
available. The Committee remains concerned that there are significant knowledge gaps related to PFAS and its impact on agriculture. Therefore, the Committee awaits a plan from USDA and 
will continue to monitor PFAS. 
Resilient Building Materials.—With increases in weather-related 
and other natural disasters, there is a clear need to increase resilience of the nation’s buildings and infrastructure. Mass timber and 
other innovative wood products, when appropriately used in the 
construction of buildings and other infrastructure, have been 
shown to withstand wind, seismic, and other natural forces with robust results. The Committee acknowledges the need to include 
these products in any categorization of products considered to be 
resilient by USDA and other Federal agencies. The Committee, 
therefore, encourages USDA to support programs that include the 
use of wood products to improve the nation’s ability to withstand 
and recover from weather-related and other natural events. 
Rural Healthcare.—The Committee is encouraged by the opportunities to address nutrition security and rural healthcare across the 
Department and urges the Department to integrate strategic outcomes from recent summits across Rural Development, Food and 
Nutrition Services, Agricultural Marketing Service to provide technical assistance and guidance with respect to these outcomes to the 
Department’s outreach, extension, and county offices, particularly 
in communities that lack application experience or healthcare facilities. 
Simplified USDA Applications.—USDA customers are overburdened with complex program applications, contracts, and reporting. 
The Committee requests a report from USDA describing the barriers to simplifying program applications, contracts, and reporting. 
The report should also include any plans USDA has to simplify 
these documents and procedures. 
Spending Plans.—The bill continues a provision in Title VII that 
requires USDA to submit spending plans to the Committee within 
30 days of enactment. Previous versions of these plans have not included adequate details that would be useful for Committee overVerDate Sep 11 2014 22:55 Jun 28, 2023 Jkt 052642 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\HR124.XXX HR124
dmwilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with REPORTS
8 
sight. The Committee requests that USDA spending plans include 
for each program, project, or activity: (1) a comparison between the 
budget justification funding levels, the most recent Congressional 
directives or approved funding levels, and the funding levels proposed by the department or agency; and (2) a clear, concise, and 
informative description/justification. The Committee reminds 
USDA of notification requirements, also included in Title VII, for 
all applicable changes. 
Status of House and Senate Report Language.—The Department 
is directed to include in its fiscal year 2025 Congressional Justification, as a single exhibit, a table listing all deliverables, with a column for due dates if applicable. OBPA is directed to provide updates on the status of House and Senate reports upon request from 
the Committees. 
Underserved Producers Program.—The Committee is concerned 
about the Department’s reckless implementation of Section 22007 
of the Inflation Reduction Act through nongovernmental entities 
who undergo no formal application process to aid farmers, ranchers, and foresters who have experienced discrimination in FSA 
lending programs. The Committee notes that the precursor to this 
provision, Section 1005 of the American Rescue Plan Act, which 
provided loan forgiveness for socially disadvantaged farmers and 
ranchers, was struck down in court on equal protection grounds. 
The Committee reminds the Department that U.S. courts have held 
that significant participation by the Federal government in nongovernmental entities’ unconstitutional actions may be a violation 
of the Fourteenth Amendment. As the Department provides nongovernmental entities with entirely Federal funds, the Committee 
will closely monitor the Department’s use and involvement in the 
administration of the Section 22007 funds. 
USDA Domestic and International Commodity Procurement Review.—The COVID–19 pandemic and resulting supply chain disruptions revealed fragilities in America’s food supply, to the detriment of farmers, producers, and consumers across America. The 
Committee directs AMS and ERS to review USDA’s application and 
enrollment procedures, required commodity quality, best and most 
available commodities for purchase regionally, and outreach practices to small and local farmers for all available domestic and international USDA procurement programs. This will help increase understanding of programs and purchasing to elevate fair participation of America’s small and local farmers. Within 180 days of enactment of this Act, AMS and ERS shall report back on their findings and efforts on improving small and local farmer procurement 
for relevant USDA programs. 
USDA Farm Delivery Systems Modernization.—The Committee 
includes language that requires the Secretary to submit a plan to 
accelerate the implementation and use of the Farmers.gov application and the Enterprise Data Analytics Platform and Toolset 
(EDAPT). The Committee is aware that despite continued direction 
and funding provided by Congress, the Farm Service Agency, the 
Farm Production and Conservation Business Center, and the Office 
of the Chief Information Officer continue to maintain numerous 
legacy mission support systems that should be decommissioned and 
transitioned to applications that are interoperable, facts-based, 
data driven, and provide excellent customer service.