As part of the Build Back Better plan, the Biden Administration has proposed several policies to 
address these long-standing cost pressures. Families with young children will tend to benefit 
most from the proposed expansion of the Child Tax Credit (CTC), universal preschool, and 
improvements in the quality of childcare and a reduction in associated out-of-pocket costs. 
Proposals to lower prescription drug cost through Medicare-negotiated prices, add dental and 
vision benefits to Medicare, and expand access to home- and community-based care through 
Medicaid are likely to be more beneficial to households with elderly members. 
Here, we present two illustrative families as benchmarks for how pieces of Build Back Better 
aim to help different types of families meet their needs. Specific numbers will vary depending on 
factors like age, state of residence, and number of children, but these examples try to convey the 
breadth of the different family policies included in the Administration’s plans. 
The first example is a family of four with two young children age 4 and 6 living in Indiana. The 
parents are both 28 years old, have full-time jobs, and together earn $65,000 per year. While the parents are at work, they send the younger child to a high-quality Indiana preschool that costs 
$9,000 annually.11
Build Back Better would dramatically reduce costs for this Indiana family example. Under Build 
Back Better’s CTC expansion, the family would receive an extra $2,600 in tax credits.12
Universal preschool would erase the $9,000 they currently spend. All told, Build Back Better 
would help the Indiana family make ends meet with $11,600 in family cost reductions.
The second illustrative family lives in Arizona, with two parents who together earn $85,000 per 
year and an adult child who lives with them and attends a community college. The family also 
cares for an elderly parent who needs arthritis medicine, which costs $5,500 per year out-ofpocket, and an eye exam to get a new pair of glasses. 
Build Back Better would help this Arizona family by making education and health care more 
affordable. The community college student would be eligible for two years of free community 
college education, saving the family $2,400 per year.13 Prescription drug reform would cap outof-pocket costs for the elderly parent’s prescription drugs, saving the family another $2,400 per 
year.14 Finally, new vision benefits under Medicare would pay for the elderly parent’s eye exam 
and new glasses and lenses, saving $450.15 All told, Build Back Better policies would save this 
Arizona family $5,250 in annual costs.