Adobe Experience Platform helps customers to centralise and standardise their customer
data and content across the enterprise – powering 360° customer profiles, enabling data
science, and data governance to drive real-time personalised experiences.
Experience Platform provides services that includes capabilities for data ingestion, wrangling and analysing
data and building predictive models and next best action. Experience Platform makes the data, content and
insights available to experience-delivery systems to act upon in real time, yielding compelling experiences in the
relevant moment. With Experience Platform, enterprises will be able to utilise completely coordinated marketing
and analytics solutions for driving meaningful customer interactions, leading to positive business results.
An integral part of Experience Platform is sharing customer experience data to improve experiences for
our customers as they work to deliver real-time experiences through our open and extensible platform.
Companies want to leverage their customer experience data and share data and insights across all their
experience applications (both Adobe applications and third-party applications). Sharing customer experience
data in multiple formats from multiple sources can require too much time and too many resources. Adobe’s
Experience Data Model (XDM) is a formal specification that you can integrate into your own data model to
create a true 360-degree view of your customer, which saves you time and makes moving your data into
Adobe Experience Cloud products a seamless process.

Company executives in a variety of industries have found themselves thinking about a single
issue: how to create a better user experience by delivering the right offer (or right message)
at the right time.
In order to find an answer to that issue, we need to understand the entire journey of a customer across multiple
touchpoints both online and offline. It’s not enough knowing how the customer interacts within a website.
You also have to know how the customer responds to emails and how they respond to any offline touchpoints
(such as customer support calls or marketing postcards). Knowing the details of the complete journey will give
businesses information they need for better personalisation and that will allow them to use machine learning
to analyse the journey and deliver an individualised experience.
Nine in ten marketers say data is their most underutilised asset. Why aren’t they deriving more value from
the terabytes of information they collect? Primarily, it’s because that data isn’t immediately usable. Information
compiled from varied sources — like websites, emails, sales, third-party vendors and even offline channels —
tends to be siloed and structured in different formats. Even when one department within a firm gets relevant
data into a format it can understand, the resulting intel is still largely unintelligible to other teams and
departments. If all that data were translated into a single language — one that is equally useful and informative
to sales representatives, IT departments, social-media marketers and customer service reps — companies
could offer customers more compelling, personalised experiences in real time.
Adobe’s Experience Data Model (XDM) is a formal specification used to describe this journey of experiences,
as well as the resulting actions and events. XDM describes not only the journey, but also the measurement,
content offers and other details of the journey. XDM is more than just a “data dictionary” for companies working
with data from customer experiences — it’s a complete language for the experience business. XDM has been
developed by Adobe as a way to make experience data easier to interpret and to share.

Companies have been chasing the 360-degree customer view for years. The biggest
problem is that every bit of data seems to be in a different format or on a different platform.
You have your website, your email offers, your customer support system, your retail store
and a rewards card, not to mention your search, display, social and video advertising across
the web. Many of the systems you use to track those items don’t talk to each other or even
store the information in a format the other systems can use.
Since you want to use machine learning to derive insights and intelligence from the data, and then use
those insights to drive company actions, those separate systems make getting a better view of your customer
a difficult and time-consuming task. How can you talk about delivering a personalised experience for your
customers if every system has a different definition of who the customer is?
To make all these disparate data sets work together and be understood, Data Engineers and Data Scientists
are in a constant process of translating and re-translating the data at every step. A large amount of that time
is spent understanding the structure of the data before they can turn the data into something meaningful that
you can use to create a better experience for your customers.
But streamlining that data is easier said than done. Almost 40 percent of advertisers employ three or more
data management platforms and 44 percent use three or more analytics platforms. By juggling multiple
different data platforms, companies are more likely drop sales leads.
Data flowing in from a company’s smartphone app, for instance, might be in a completely different language
than the data acquired from an email marketing campaign, a third-party vendor or from the point of sale.
The average data scientist spends about 80 percent of their day preparing raw data for analysis, according
to a recent poll from data mining company CrowdFlower.
Every hour spent cleaning and structuring data is time that could be better spent drawing useful insights
from that data, so companies can devise engaging customer experiences.
Imagine if sales and marketing data existed in a single, standardised language from the moment it’s
compiled — the same way Adobe standardised PDF for documents.

Every business is an Experience Business. Whether you’re selling a product, a service or even
an event, as long as another person is expected to interact with your company or product
or service, then you are creating an experience. This is especially true for any business (or
department) that deals with a customer’s ongoing interaction, such as customer support
or loyalty clubs.
XDM is a specification that describes the elements of those interactions. XDM can describe a consumer’s
preferences and qualify what audiences they are part of and then categorise information about their online
journey (such as what buttons they click on or what they add to a shopping cart). XDM can also define
offline interactions such as loyalty-club memberships.
XDM is a core part of the Adobe Experience Platform, built with partners and global brands that are
strategically investing in this shared vision of omnipresent and consistent first-class customer experience.
Modern customer interactions are unique because they go beyond what historically common data modelling
can support. Interacting with digital audiences requires capabilities such as engaging content, insights from
data at scale, complete data awareness, identity management, unified profiles, omni-channel and experiencecentric metadata, and the blending of real-time with historical behavioural data. Often, this data comes from
multiple different vendors representing online behaviour across web and mobile and offline behavior for instore purchases, demographic information and user preferences. It is a labour-intensive process to combine
all of these disparate data sources to get a 360-degree view of a consumer and speak to them with one
voice across the various channels. XDM is the language to express these experiences.