**Zeroing in on Healthy Air**
Executive Summary 
Zeroing in on Healthy Air is a report by the American Lung Association illustrating the public health urgency of policies and investments for transitioning to zero-emission transportation and electricity generation in the coming decades. These sectors are leading sources of unhealthy air in the United States. Today, over four in ten Americans — more than 135 million people — live in communities impacted by unhealthy levels of air pollution. Research demonstrates that the burdens of unhealthy air include increased asthma attacks, heart attacks and strokes, lung cancer and premature death. These poor health outcomes are not shared equitably, with many communities of color and lower income communities at greater risk due to increased exposure to transportation pollution. The transportation sector is also the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions that drive climate change, which threatens clean air progress and amplifies a wide range of health risks and disparities. This report finds that a national shift to 100 percent sales of zero-emission passenger vehicles (by 2035) and medium- and heavy-duty trucks (by 2040), coupled with renewable electricity would generate over $1.2 trillion in public health benefits between 2020 and 2050. These benefits would take the form of avoiding up to 110,000 premature deaths, along with nearly 3 million asthma attacks and over 13 million workdays lost due to cleaner air. This report calculates the emission reductions possible from shifting to vehicles without tailpipes, as well as eliminating fuel combustion from the electricity generation sector so that neither those living near roads or near electricity generation would be subjected to unacceptable doses of toxic air pollution. The report also highlights the fact that the shift to zeroemission transportation and electricity generation in the United States will yield avoided global climate damages over $1.7 trillion. By expediting investments and policies at the local, state and federal levels to reduce harmful pollution, all communities stand to experience cleaner air. Policies and investments must prioritize low-income communities and communities of color that bear a disproportionate pollution burden. State and local jurisdictions should act to implement policies as soon as possible, including in advance of the benchmarks used in this report’s methodology. These actions are needed to achieve clean air, reduce health disparities and avoid even more dire consequences of climate change. 
The Public Health Need for Zero Emissions Air Pollution Remains a Major Threat to Americans’ Health Despite decades of progress to clean the air, more than 4 in 10 of all Americans — 135 million — still live in a community impacted by unhealthy levels of air pollution.ii Those impacted by polluted air face increased risk of a wide range of poor health outcomes as the result of increased ozone and/or particle pollution.iii The adverse impacts of pollution from the transportation and electricity generation sectors are clear, and must be recognized as a threat to local community health, health equity and a driver of major climate change-related health risks. Even with certification to meet existing standards, it is clear that combustion technologies often generate far greater levels of pollution in the real world than on paper. 
Location Matters: Disparities in Exposure Burden Exposure to pollution with its associated negative health consequences is dictated by where someone lives, attends school or works. In general, the higher the exposure, the greater the risk of harm. Many communities face disproportionate burdens due to pollution generated from production, transportation, refining and combustion of fuels along the transportation and electricity generating systems. Lower income communities and communities of color are often the most over-burdened by pollution sources today due to decades of inequitable land use decisions and systemic racism. The American Lung Association’s State of the Air 2021 report illustrated the disparities in pollution burdens across the United States, noting that a person of color in the United States is up to three times more likely to be breathing the most polluted air than white people.v All sources of harmful air and climate pollution must shift rapidly away from combustion and toward zero-emission technologies to ensure all Americans have access to the benefits of less polluting technologies. 
Estimated Benefits of Zero-Emission Transportation and Electricity Generation The combustion of fuels in the electricity generation and transportation sectors is a major contributor to the health and climate burdens facing all Americans. These sources of pollution also create significant disparities in pollution burdens and poor health, especially in lower-income communities and communities of color. The transition to non-combustion technologies is underway and must continue to accelerate to protect the health of communities today and across the coming decades. Key findings are presented below: Pollution Reduction Benefits from Zero-Emission Transportation Accelerating the shift to zero-emission transportation and non-combustion electricity generation will generate major reductions in harmful pollutants. Key pollutants included in this research are described below along with projected onroad pollution reductions with the shift to zero-emission technologies when compared with a modeled “Business As Usual” case for the on-road fleet. 
Benefits of Moving All Vehicle Classes to Zero-Emissions All vehicles must move to zero-emission technologies to ensure the most robust public health benefits occur. The 2020 passenger vehicle fleet represents approximately 94 percent of the nation’s on-road vehicle fleet and generates over 1 million tons of ozone- and particle-forming NOx emissions, and over 33,400 tons of fine particles annually. Heavy-duty vehicles represent approximately six percent of the on-road fleet in 2020, but generate 59 percent of ozone- and particle-forming NOx emissions and 55 percent of the particle pollution (including brake and tire particles). Differentiating the relative impacts of fleet segments is particularly important when considering the concentrations of heavy-duty vehicles in environmental justice areas near highways, ports, railyards and warehouse settings. For greenhouse gases (GHG), the 2020 light duty vehicle fleet generates approximately 69 percent of GHG emissions, while the heavy-duty fleet produces 31 percent. The table below illustrates the relative emission reduction benefits of on-road transportation electrification for each the light-duty fleet and the medium- and heavy-duty segments compared with the “Business-As-Usual” case. It is important to note that these on-road reductions could yield major benefits within each class, with light-duty vehicles reducing nearly twice the GHGs as heavy-duty, while heavy-duty engines could yield approximately eight times the smog- and particle-forming NOx emissions when compared with the light-duty fleet. Ultimately, all segments produce harmful pollutants and must move quickly to zero-emissions to protect health and reduce climate pollution. 
National Results: Public Health and Climate Benefits The shift to zero-emission transportation and non-combustion electricity generation could yield major health benefits throughout the nation in the coming decades. Cumulatively, the national benefits of transitioning away from combustion in the transportation sector toward 100 percent zero-emission sales and a non-combustion electricity generation sector could generate over $1.2 trillion in health benefits across the United States between 2020 and 2050. These benefits include approximately 110,000 lives saved, over 2.7 million asthma attacks avoided (among those aged 6-18 years), 13.4 million lost works days and a wider range of other negative health impacts avoided due to cleaner air.1,2 In addition to these health benefits, this analysis found that over $1.7 trillion in global climate benefits could be achieved with a reduction of over 24 billion metric tons of GHGs by mid-century.
Near-Term Health Benefits While the benefits noted above are cumulative between 2020 and 2050, this analysis also finds that annual health benefits could reach into the tens of billions by the end of this decade – nearly $28 billion in 2030 alone. Health benefits increase significantly as deployments of zero-emission technologies in the transportation and electricity generating sectors expand. 
State Results: Public Health Benefits Across the United States Every state in the U.S. stands to experience significant public health benefits from the widespread implementation of zero-emission transportation and electricity resources over the coming decades. As shown below, more than half of the states could experience more than $10 billion in cumulative public health benefits. Two states (California and Texas) could exceed $100 billion in health benefits, and six more states (Pennsylvania, Florida, Ohio, New York, Illinois, and Michigan) could see benefits exceeding $50 billion by 2050. These benefits cover a wide range of avoided health impacts, three of which (premature deaths, asthma attacks, lost workdays) are shown in the table below. 
Local Results: Public Health Benefits Across America Communities across the United States stand to benefit from the widespread transition to zero-emission transportation and electricity generation. As transportation emissions are a dominant source of local exposures in many communities, a carefully and equitably designed shift to non-combustion transportation can mean cleaner air for all, and especially those most burdened by pollution from these sources today. Similarly, a shift away from fossil-fueled electricity generation is critical to improving the health of those most impacted by emissions from power plants, including in lower-income, rural communities across the United States. This analysis found that the 100 U.S. counties (roughly 3 percent of all counties assessed) with the highest percent populations of People of Color could experience approximately 13 percent of the cumulative health benefits of this transition ($155 billion, between 2020-2050). Expanding this further, the 500 U.S. Counties (16 percent of counties assessed) with the highest percent populations of People of Color could experience 40 percent of the benefits, or $487 billion cumulatively between 2020 and 2050. It is also clear that the presence of benefits within these counties does not directly translate to benefits to individual neighborhoods or residents, however. This is an indicator of the urgent need to center equity in policies and investments to ensure access to the benefits of pollution-free mobility and power. Additional analysis of the benefits in rural communities, lower-income communities, and neighborhood exposure levels could provide deeper insights into more equitable policy and investment designs. At a broader scale, this analysis shows a leveling of benefits across the country as the locations of power plants and transportation hubs are often impacting communities with varying socioeconomic characteristics. As shown in the table on the next page, communities across the United States could experience billions in public health benefits, and significantly reduce premature deaths, asthma attacks and other negative health consequences of polluted air through 2050. The table includes the 25 Metropolitan Areas across the United States showing the largest cumulative health benefits by 2050 considering the shift to non-combustion electricity generation and zero emission transportation. 