Deficits, Debt, and Interest
The annual differences between revenue (i.e., taxes and fees) that the government collects and
outlays (i.e., spending) result in the budget deficit (or surplus). Annual budget deficits or
surpluses determine, over time, the level of publicly held federal debt and affect the level of
interest payments to finance the debt.
Budget Deficits
Between FY2009 and FY2012, annual budgets as a percentage of GDP were sharply higher than
deficits in any period since FY1945.27 The unified budget deficit in FY2015 was $439 billion, or
2.5% of GDP—the lowest level since FY2007. The unified deficit, according to some budget
experts, gives an incomplete view of the government’s fiscal conditions because it includes off-
budget surpluses.28 Excluding off-budget items (Social Security benefits paid net of Social 
Security payroll taxes collected and the U.S. Postal Service’s net balance), the on-budget FY2015
federal deficit was $466 billion.
Budget Deficit for FY2016
The January 2016 CBO baseline estimated the FY2016 budget deficit at $544 billion, or 2.9% of
GDP. The rise in the estimated budget deficit for FY2016 is the result of increases in spending
more than offsetting a smaller rise in revenues. FY2016 outlays are projected to increase to
21.2% of GDP, up from 20.7% of GDP in FY2015; revenues are projected to increase from
18.2% of GDP to 18.3% of GDP over the same period.
Federal Debt and Debt Limit
Gross federal debt is composed of debt held by the public and intragovernmental debt.
Intragovernmental debt is the amount owed by the federal government to other federal agencies,
to be paid by the Department of the Treasury, which mostly consists of money contained in trust
funds. Debt held by the public is the total amount the federal government has borrowed from the
public and remains outstanding. This measure is generally considered to be the most relevant in
macroeconomic terms because it is the debt sold in credit markets. Changes in debt held by the
public generally track the movements of the annual unified deficits and surpluses.29
Historically, Congress has set a ceiling on federal debt through a legislatively established limit.
The debt limit also imposes a form of fiscal accountability that compels Congress, in the form of
a vote authorizing a debt limit increase, and the President, by signing the legislation, to take
visible action to allow further federal borrowing when nearing the statutory limit.
The debt limit by itself has no effect on the borrowing needs of the government.30 The debt limit,
however, can hinder the Treasury’s ability to manage the federal government’s finances when the
amount of federal debt approaches this ceiling, or when the suspension expires. In those
instances, the Treasury has had to take extraordinary measures to meet federal obligations,
leading to inconvenience and uncertainty in Treasury operations at times.31 At the end of CY2015
(December 31, 2015), federal debt subject to limit was approximately $18.922 trillion, of which
$13.673 trillion was held by the public.32
The debt limit is currently suspended until March 15, 2017. Upon reinstatement, the debt limit
will be modified to exactly accommodate any increases in statutory debt subject to limit above
the previous limit ($18.1 trillion). At the end of calendar year 2015, total debt subject to limit was
$18.9 trillion. Barring advanced legislative action, the debt limit will be reached when reinstated,
so long as federal debt remains above the previous limit and continues to rise.
Net Interest
In FY2015, the United States spent $223 billion, or 1.3% of GDP, on net interest payments on the
debt. What the government pays in interest depends on market interest rates as well as on the size
and composition of the federal debt. Currently, low interest rates have held net interest payments
as a percentage of GDP below the historical average despite increases in borrowing to finance the
debt.33 Some economists, however, have expressed concern that federal interest costs could rise
once the economy fully recovers, resulting in future strain on the budget. Interest rates are
projected to gradually rise in the CBO baseline, resulting in net interest payments of $830 billion
(3.0% of GDP) in FY2026. If interest costs rise to this level, they will be higher than the
historical average.