The analysis of the statistical results obtained from the univariate financial ratios model and Ahmed (2003) model indicate that the Sudanese banks are not financially sound. The liquidity ratios show that there has been deterioration in the liquidity position of the banking industry in Sudan. Since banks depend heavily on lending to generate revenues, the shortage in liquidity weakens their financing capability, which in turn negatively affects their earnings. Furthermore, the lack of liquidity may force banks either to sell assets or pay a premium on borrowed funds. The indebtedness measures reveal that banks are highly leveraged and thus are of high risk. This asserts that the banks will find it hard to get further financing from both national and international financial markets. This high credit risk also suggests that the bank is no longer attractive for the depositors. This is confirmed by the deposits structure of banks, which are mainly demand ones. This result is expected because the Marabaha margin, which indicates the return on investment deposits, almost remains fixed at 12% over the period examined and this percentage is far below inflation levels. This explains the shrinkage in investment deposits through time and signalizes the inability of
banks to earn satisfactory profits. Additionally, the profitability measures indicate that banks do generate sufficient profits from their operations. Due to the high level of inflation, the bank's managements find it difficult to pay dividends and also secure internal fund to sustain any growth strategy. The turnover financial metrics indicate that
the management of banks are inefficient in employing their working capital to generate revenues and are generally not optimizing the utilization of assets. This inefficient use of assets justifies the low level of profitability realized by those banks.
The results obtained from the analysis of the depositors’ confidence index indicate that the depositors slightly trust the banks operating in Sudan. This finding is highly expected as the previous studies provide evidence that factors such as slumping economy, turbulent political climate, high inflation, inconsistent policies and regulations, weak transparency, undercapitalization of banks, which are all prevailing in Sudan, negatively affect the confidence of depositors in their banks. This weak trust implies that the depositors are not sure that their banks can safely secure their deposits and thus are skeptical that their banks are able to pay them back their money. The low confidence in banks also indicates that the depositors are doubtful about the competency, integrity and transparency of their banks’ management. Further, the undercapitalization of banks triggers a fear of banks failure and thus loss of depositors’
money. Additionally, the inconsistent and ever-changing government policies, especially the monetary and credit ones, the weak legal and regulatory systems and laws, the deteriorating economic conditions of the country and the political instability and erratic country foreign relationships, signal that banks will suffer from financial difficulties in
the near future and initiate a strong tendency towards cash withdrawal from banks.
The analysis also shows that the privately-owned banks do not perform better than the government-owned ones. This result may be attributed to the fact that the government-owned banks are supported by the government. That is to say, the government usually injects funds in those banks that are in bad need for financing. The same logic applies for the better performance of the specialized banks as compared to the nonspecialized ones. The specialized banks are highly propped by the government. For instance, the Central bank has decreased the legal monetary reserve required
for the banks that provide finance to agricultural, industrial and mineral mining projects, in an attempt to boost exports. With regards to the comparison of the financial health of the foreign banks with that of the national banks, the analysis indicates that the financial health of both groups is similar, which led to the reasoning that the foreign banks have not benefited from their developed expertise, overseas existence and access the international financial market to strengthen their financial positions.
The contrary conclusion arrived at by the employment of EM Z-score model that banks operating in Sudan are generally healthy and financially viable may be in the context that, though the banking sector in Sudan is not financially sound, within the near future of two years most of the banks will not be bankrupt.
Several practical implications can be derived from the results of this study. To enhance the financial health of banks and boost the level of confidence in them a number of corrective actions need to be taken by banks management as well as regulatory bodies. Enhancing transparency through adopting enforceable comprehensive disclosure measures, imposing corporate governance, strengthening banks’ capitals and lowering operating costs are some suggested corrective actions. Regulators also need to set rules that protect depositors and safeguard their money.