Due to technological advancement, technology acceptance and adoption became an
important and distinct topic of this study, especially regarding e-commerce (Rahi et al.,
2020). The UTAUT 2 model was developed in research by Venkatesh et al. (2012) to
enhance the explanatory power of the previous UTAUT version (Venkatesh et al., 2003).
The original UTAUT model which consist of four variables which is effort expectancy
(EE), performance expectancy (PE) facilitating condition (FC) and social influence (SI),
was highly used by scholars to predict the intention to use new technology. Despite its’
popularity, the model was not lacking of criticism due to its incapability to include
essential determinant of technology usage behaviour (Beh et al., 2019). To overcome
those criticism, Venkatesh et al. (2012) compensate the limitation of the original UTAUT
with the additional three variables which is habit (HB), hedonic motivation (HM) and
price value (PV). On top of that, the UTAUT 2 also focusing to the post usage behaviour.
Various literature has confirming that the capability of the UTAUT 2 in explaining the
continuance behaviour of technology usage. Since Spotify Premium is considered a new
technology in music industry, thus, it suits well with the concept in UTAUT.
Furthermore, despite having high explanatory power, (Rondan-Cataluña et al., 2015)
confirmed that UTAUT 2 has better predictive power compared to other technological
acceptance model. Thus, provide a valid reason why the study relies on this model to
predict continuance behaviour of subscribing the Spotify Premium among university
students in Malaysia.
Unravelling the continue of subscribing Spotify Premium 5
2.2 BI
BI can be categorised as intention to use of continue of use of particular services. In the
context of this study, BI refers to the intention to continue of subscribing the Spotify
Premium. Continue of use always related to the behavioural of loyalty (Han et al., 2009).
Since many of music streaming available in the market and each providers are offering
unique features (Weinberger and Bouhnik, 2020), thus, critical to understand the reason
behind the continued use of the application so that the service providers can guarantee
their service remain competitive, for business sustainability and the ability to survive in a
tough business environment. It is useless for the company to enhance its services if they
fail to retain current customers or attract new clients. Furthermore, to increase the
continue of use could be considered as a main goal in the service providers (Batouei
et al., 2020).
2.3 EE
EE is the level of convenience consumers experience when utilising a technology
(Venkatesh et al., 2012). In this research, EE refers to the convenience of Spotify
Premium usage among university students in Malaysia. Moreover, convenience refers to
the ease in application usage; thus, the higher intention to use and continued usage. Also,
university students classified as Generation Y (Gen. Y) are closely connected with
technology use and thus experienced ease in utilising the Spotify Premium. Hence, EE is
expected to produce a positive relationship with BI to continue the Spotify Premium
subscription. Strengthened by a previous study, which discovered that EE has a positive
relationship with BI regarding the usage of smartwatch (Beh et al., 2019), mobile
financial services (Rahman et al., 2020), continued music streaming subscription (Lüders,
2020) and e-hailing technology. Therefore, this study proposes the following:
Hypothesis 1 (H1) EE has a positive relationship with BI of Spotify Premium
subscription.
2.4 FC
FC’s refer to a person’s beliefs in the technical support available to advocate new
technology use (Venkatesh et al., 2012). This study examined the availability of Spotify’s
support for premium subscribers concerning the application. Paid music services require
fast and up-to-date technology, namely advanced electronic equipment and an internet
connection to ensure smooth and seamless music streaming. FC’s such as the skills and
ability to handle the devices are crucial factors and predictors of BI due to rapid
technological changes in the music streaming industry, such as computers, smartphones,
tablets, the internet, online customer support (Pinochet et al., 2019). This research
examined previous literature in proving the positive relationship between FC and BI,
such as the study by Beh et al. (2019) and Rahman et al. (2020). University students also
found that FC and BI was positively related in the context of learning management
system (Sharif et al., 2019). Hence, this paper proposed that:
Hypothesis 2 (H2) FC has positive effects on the BI of the Spotify Premium
subscription.
6 M.S.M. Suhod et al.
2.5 Habit
Habit (HB) is the extent to which an individual believes his behaviour is a result of
experience; the individual tends to perform that behaviour automatically based on
learning from past experience (Venkatesh et al., 2012). Habit occurs when one
consistently performs an activity, such as when they experience joy and happiness while
performing the activities or when the activity suits the individual. According to Soares
et al. (2020), habit could be influenced by past behaviour and personal experience in
applying particular system or products. If past experience produced favourable results,
there is high tendency to transform the particular behaviour to become a habit. Past
studies showed that habit produced a positive relationship with BI (Ameri et al., 2020;
Nikolopoulou et al., 2020; Soares et al., 2020). From that, the study proposed:
Hypothesis 3 (H3) Habit has positive effects on BI of Spotify Premium subscription
2.6 HM
HM is the enjoyment or pleasure from technology usage (Venkatesh et al., 2012). This
study defined HM as the enjoyment of Spotify Premium usage to enjoy music streaming.
Based on research by Beh et al. (2019), HM showed a positive relationship with BI in the
usage of smartwatches. Plus, Greece university students showed that their HM had a
positive relationship with BI concerning mobile phone usage (Nikolopoulou et al., 2020).
Hence, this paper suggested:
Hypothesis 4 (H4) HM produced a positive effect on the BI of the Spotify Premium
subscription.
2.7 PE
PE refers to the competence of applications or new technology to assist users in
performing certain activities substantially and conveniently (Venkatesh et al., 2012). A
study by Malik (2017) stated that users are more interested in applications that improve
their performance and productivity through better content knowledge and thus resulting
in content awareness and the ability to provide an application that performs well.
Previous studies on the continued use of technology discovered that PE has a positive
relationship with BI (Ameri et al., 2020; Nikolopoulou et al., 2020; Rahman et al., 2020).
With regards to that, the study proposed:
Hypothesis 5 (H5) PE has a positive effect on the BI of Spotify Premium subscription.
2.8 PV
PV refers to the relationship between consumers’ cognitive trade-off between the benefits
gained versus the amount paid for the services (Venkatesh et al., 2012). Spotify Premium
users will continue their subscription if the subscription is worth paying based on the
services provided. Plus, when there is beneficial experience from using the Spotify
Premium, or the received benefits are greater than the cost. Previously, it was discovered
that the PV has a positive relationship with the continued subscription of music streaming
services (Lüders, 2020).
Unravelling the continue of subscribing Spotify Premium 7
Additionally, the PV created a positive relationship with the BI on the continued
subscription to music streaming (Lüders, 2020) and continued use of mobile financial
services (Rahman et al., 2020). Consequently, the study proposed:
Hypothesis 6 (H6) PV produced positive effects on the BI of Spotify Premium
subscription.
2.9 SI
According to Venkatesh et al. (2012), SI refers to the extent of family and friend’s
influence on consumers in terms of the decision to use technology. In this particular
research, SI is the extent to which a university student perceives the influential person
can cause them to believe that they should subscribe to Spotify Premium. Since in
campus life, majority of the students spent their time with their colleague and they tend to
share the experience with their people around them. Hence, what are their surrounding
behaviour and thinking will have an impact in their daily life. Family and friend’s
perception will influence the students’ decision. Furthermore, most students are
encouraged by trend and peer pressure. SI has a positive relationship with the BI of
pharmacy students’ continued use of the mobile-based educational application (Ameri
et al., 2020) and Greece students’ continued use of mobile phones in their study
(Nikolopoulou et al., 2020). Therefore, the study suggested: