Healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) represent a significant public health burden, where an estimated 1 in 31 patients that enter a hospital will go on to develop an HAI, resulting in an additional $28.4 billion in healthcare-related expenses and 100,000 deaths1,2. Among HAIs, urinary tract infections (UTIs) are the most common, affecting over 400 million people worldwide in 2019 alone3. UTIs can be distinguished as complicated or uncomplicated. Up to 75–85% of uncomplicated UTIs are caused by uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC)4,5,6. Unlike uncomplicated UTIs, catheter-associated UTI (CAUTI) is caused by a diverse range of pathogens, including UPEC (23.9%), fungal Candida spp. (17.8%), Enterococcus spp. (13.8%), P. aeruginosa (10.3%), and Klebsiella sp. (10.1%)7,8. Uncomplicated UTIs (uUTIs) predominantly affect pre-menopausal and non-pregnant women and occur in otherwise healthy individuals with no functional or structural abnormalities of the kidneys or urinary tract4. Complicated UTIs (cUTIs) occur in individuals with additional risk factors, including underlying health conditions and abnormalities or obstructions in the kidneys and urinary tract, pregnancy, and intermittent or long-term catheterization4.
 

 It is estimated that 15-25% of hospitalized patients will receive a urinary catheter and that 75% of healthcare-acquired UTIs are associated with catheterization9. Furthermore, the risk of bacterial colonization of a catheter increases 3–7% per day upon placement, with the risk of catheter colonization and associated complications near 100% in long-term catheterized patients10,11. The treatment of UTIs has been complicated by the rise of antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) uropathogens, many of which were cited as urgent or serious threats in the CDC’s 2019 Antibiotic Threats Report. These AMR pathogens were classified as: (i) urgent, carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales; and (ii) serious, drug-resistant Candida, ESBL- Enterobacterales, vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)12. Indeed, a 2019 report listed UTIs as one of the leading global causes of AMR-associated deaths13. As these uropathogens become increasingly antibiotic-resistant, new treatment strategies are necessary to combat the rise of antibiotic-resistant UTIs.
 

 Another factor complicating the treatment of CAUTIs is the high prevalence of polymicrobial catheter colonization, with 31–87% of catheters and urine from catheterized patients colonized by two or more species, depending on the study14,15,16. Polymicrobial bacteraemic UTIs are associated with increased mortality relative to bacteraemic UTIs caused by a single uropathogen17. The relationships between the bacteria in these polymicrobial communities is still poorly understood, including the mechanistic drivers of the positive species interactions that promote species co-occurrence and the negative species interactions that prevent co-occurrence in the same microenvironment. During urinary catheterization, the host wounding response results in the deposition of host proteins, including fibrinogen, onto the catheter that can be used by several bacterial species as a food source and as a means to adhere to and form biofilms on the catheter18,19,20. Positive co-occurrences between species may thus result from pioneer species that are able to colonize the catheter and then recruit other microbial species, forming polymicrobial communities. While this has been demonstrated to occur in the polymicrobial communities of oral biofilms, wherein certain groups of bacteria, including streptococci and Actinomyces species, serve as the pioneering species that can adhere to enamel pellicle and facilitate the colonization of other microbial species, the establishment of pioneer species and the subsequent effects on colonization in CAUTI has yet to be fully elucidated21,22. Within these communities, “cross-feeding” or “cross-signaling” may occur to augment the growth and/or biofilm formation of one or more of the species. Further, it has been shown that E. faecalis can suppress the host innate immune response, allowing for augmented growth of E. coli in a co-infection model of CAUTI23. Negative co-occurrences may be due to competition for nutrients or alterations in host response. For instance, MRSA elicits a robust host response which may result in decreased co-colonization by other bacterial species that are unable to withstand this response24. Understanding the mechanisms that drive the formation and persistence of these communities is essential to designing new therapeutics that target the bacterial interactions that promote CAUTI.