Title: Wharfedale Diamonds Shine Even Brighter

Wharfedale's classic Diamond lineage of high-performance, high-value speakers reaches new heights with the Diamond 200 Series

Huntingdon, England -- For more than 30 years, Wharfedale’s famous Diamond speakers have served as the classic entry point to true high-fidelity sound, their exceptional value for money earning dozens of awards around the globe. Now, with the introduction of the all-new Diamond 200 Series, Wharfedale has once again raised the bar for affordable, high-performance loudspeakers.

Replacing the critically acclaimed Diamond 100 Series, Diamond 200 comprises two standmount speakers and three floorstanding models, plus a center speaker for home cinema use. Given that the speakers’ predecessors were so highly rated for their sound quality, Wharfedale's engineers took an evolutionary approach, precisely targeting key areas to improve in order to make an already great loudspeaker range deliver even better value for money.

Enhancements across the range include:

New cabinet construction – a sandwich of particleboard between MDF, which has enabled improvements both aesthetic and sonic.
New lacquered baffle design further enhances aesthetic qualities.
Improved bass motor system with larger magnets makes the speakers easier to drive and boosts transient acoustic power.
Enhanced 'Slot-Loaded Distributed Port' – improved airflow control lowers turbulence and hence reduces low-frequency distortion.
Upgraded crossover networks further improve the integration between the drive units.
The Wharfedale Diamond 200 Series in full

The first Diamond 200 Series model to launch is the Diamond 220. Available now, this pivotal model is the latest evolution of Wharfedale’s classic Diamond standmount speaker – a neatly proportioned design with a 130mm mid/bass driver. It is the direct replacement for the best-selling Diamond 121 from the outgoing Diamond 100 Series, benefitting from all the enhancements described above, yet Wharfedale has managed to shave £30 off the RRP – the Diamond 220 has an RRP of just £199.95 per pair.

The remaining Diamond 200 Series models arrive this month. These include the Diamond 210, an ultra-compact speaker for rear/surround duties or stereo applications where space is at a premium (£149.95 per pair), plus three floorstanders – the Diamond 230 (£499.95 per pair), Diamond 240 (£699.95 per pair), and Diamond 250 (£999.95 per pair).

The Diamond 220C home cinema center speaker (£199.95) completes the range. Anyone wishing to compile a 5.1 or 7.1 surround sound package from the Diamond 200 Series can add an active subwoofer from Wharfedale’s highly rated PowerCube SPC range, selecting an appropriate model to suit their room.

Many of the speakers’ core features are unchanged from the Diamond 100 Series. The bass and midrange cones are fashioned from woven Kevlar and incorporate semi-elliptical ‘break-up’ areas – visible as raised ‘V’ shapes on the cone’s surface – that smooth the response throughout the audible range. The dust cap is blended and treated to provide a smooth transition with the treble unit, which incorporates an advanced ferrite magnet system and a carefully constructed waveguide around the fabric dome for optimal dispersion.

Bass performance is enhanced by a newly refined version of the Slot-Loaded Distributed Port, first introduced in the outgoing Diamond 100 Series. Instead of the usual circular reflex port, all Diamond 200 Series models incorporate a port that exits at the base of the speaker cabinet, loaded by a slot that is created by the plinth. This equalizes the air pressure to mimic that inside the cabinet, allowing smooth transition between the pressure variation in the cabinet and the low-frequency sound developed in the room.

The result is deep, articulate and well-integrated bass, without the ‘chuffing’ that is often associated with regular front- or rear-mounted ports. It also allows the speakers to be placed closer to a rear wall than is appropriate with most competing designs, making them easier to position in an average room. No other speaker range at such affordable price points implements an advanced bass loading system of this kind.

All Wharfedale Diamond 200 Series speakers come in a choice of four finishes – black, white, walnut, and rosewood – adding to their smart aesthetics and excellent value for money.

Designer’s notes: Peter Comeau, Wharfedale’s Director of Acoustic Design

Peter Comeau, Wharfedale’s Director of Acoustic Design, describes the improvements he and his team have brought to the Diamond 200 Series:

When Wharfedale launched the very first Diamond in 1981, the company defined a new class of speaker that delivered genuine hi-fi accuracy and musical brio at a remarkably affordable price. Since then, every iteration of the famous Diamond line has adhered to that tradition but improved upon it. Our challenge with the Diamond 200 Series was to further enhance every model across the range, whilst maintaining the traditionally affordable retail prices that embody the Diamond ethos – no mean feat at a time when other manufacturers are being forced to raise the prices of equivalent ranges.

It is no coincidence that research from loudspeakers further up the Wharfedale range has crept downwards into the Diamond 200 Series. Whilst higher retail price points permit the advanced research that lets Wharfedale engineers investigate cutting-edge performance in acoustic technology, the trick is to use the benefits of this research and apply it to materials that can be produced in higher quantities with the benefit of lower cost to production.

That’s no more apparent than in the Diamond 200 Series’ new cabinet material. Research undertaken for Wharfedale’s upmarket Jade Series yielded a matrix of materials called Crystalam, which reduced the audibility of panel resonance and what our engineers call ‘cabinet hear-through’. This research showed that coherent materials, like raw MDF, have peak resonances (particularly in the midrange) that let sound out of a cabinet at volume levels that interfere with the sound from the drive units. Not surprisingly, this ‘hear-through’ causes a distinct coloration and character to the sound of such cabinets.

In Jade’s Crystalam, Wharfedale put together a matrix of non-coherent materials comprising differing densities of particleboard and MDF, substantially reducing both panel resonance and cabinet hear-through. For the Diamond 200 Series, we found that a simpler ‘sandwich’ combination of particleboard and MDF, whilst not quite reaching to the absolute standards of Crystalam, yielded similar reductions in coloration at considerably lower cost. In addition, the inner and outer layers of MDF allow a superior finish to the cabinet veneers, enhancing the aesthetic quality of the speakers in comparison to the outgoing Diamond 100 Series.

Topping this new cabinet material is a simple, one-piece baffle lacquered to a highly polished finish that cosmetically matches the silver-colored, diamond-cut drive unit surrounds. The result is an attractive appearance, with or without grilles, that makes Diamond 200 Series speakers look more expensive than they actually are, adding to their exceptional value for money.

Additional improvements inside the speakers enhance sound quality in comparison to the already highly acclaimed Diamond 100 Series. Bass unit motor systems have been further refined, with corresponding increases in magnet size, making the speakers easier to drive and boosting transient acoustic power.

Furthermore, we have taken note of how most users are placing their speakers in their rooms. These days, loudspeakers are often expected to blend into room furnishings rather than take up a significant amount of space. This is particularly true of low-cost speakers like those in the Diamond 200 Series, which are expected to fit seamlessly into average-size living rooms. For this reason, the ability to be positioned close to a rear wall is important. The balance of the Diamond 200 Series takes this into account, with the standmount speakers having a recommended minimum of 50mm to the rear wall, alongside a minimum of 200mm for the floorstanders – considerably closer positioning than is possible with many similar-sized designs.

This freedom of positioning is aided by the Slot-Loaded Distributed Port, again grown out of our research into the Jade Aperiodic bass loading system. While the Diamond 200 Series bass system is strictly bass reflex, with its attendant bonus of high sensitivity, the slot-loaded port, which uses a gap between the plinth and the port exit in the base of the cabinet, aids the pressure differential between the port and the air in the room, increasing the energy transfer and making the system more efficient. Attendant with the increase in bass driver power, Diamond 200 Series speakers now have an added degree of airflow control to the port exit, which effectively reduces turbulence in this region and reduces low-frequency distortion.

Finally, but not least of the Diamond 200 Series improvements, the crossovers have been refined over hundreds of hours of listening tests to further improve the integration between the drive units and herald a new level of realism to instruments and voices.

The result of all these technical endeavors is, we feel, the best Diamond Series yet, delivering loudspeakers which reveal a whole new level of musical detail and transient attack, drawing the listener into the musical performance in a way that is normally only expected from speakers at a considerably higher price level.