Breaking the Habit of Being Yourself
By
Dr.Joe Dispenza
Big Idea #1: To Change Your Life, Change Your Thoughts
This idea is actually in the very first chapter of the book. Dr. Joe Dispenza starts
off explaining how our beliefs or thoughts, lead to our feelings which lead to
our actions which ultimately leads to our results. This is exactly the same as the
concept of ‘TFAR’ in T. Harv Eker’s book ‘The Millionaire Mind”. However,
instead of giving simple practical examples, Dr. Joe Dispenza uses the concept
of Quantum Physics and other physics concepts to prove this point.
Basically, everything in the physical universe is made up of subatomic particles
such as electrons. These particles exist as pure potential. They are in their
wave state when they’re not being observed. These particles are potential
‘everything’ and ‘nothing’ until they are observed. Hence everything in our
physical reality exists as pure potential. What Dispenza means by being
‘observed’ is when we don’t actively look out for it. But when we do see it and
‘observe’ it, we can start to act upon it.
What this ultimately implies is that the quantum field or the universe for this
matter contains a reality in anything you want. So if you want to become a
millionaire, the universe contains a reality in which you are a millionaire. And 
since our consciousness has effects on energy, we are powerful enough to
influence matter. (I know this is a bit too technical but stay with me).
Now, the whole point of using this concept of quantum physics is to prove only
one point. We can master our skills of observation to intentionally affect our
destiny, our life, and our results. In this case, Dispenza uses ‘observation’ to
mean we can master what we ‘focus’ on to change our results. To quote Henry
Ford:
“Whether you think you can, or you think you can’t, you’re right” – Henry Ford
For example, I had a friend who was quite miserable at his job. He wanted a
pay rise but didn’t think he’d deserve it so he would never ask. A month later,
something happened at work and he was blamed for something he didn’t do.
He was really mad and thought staying in this job just isn’t worth it for the
amount of pay he was getting. So he wanted to quit. But before he quit, he
asked for a pay rise first because he had nothing to lose. To his surprise, his
boss actually gave him a 10% pay rise. He was delighted and didn’t end up
quitting.
Now the sudden change in his thoughts to think of himself worthy of getting a
pay rise – was the change in his skill to ‘observe’, his ability to change his
‘focus’. He first focused on how h ewasn’t worth an increase in salary to
focussing on the fact that the job wasn’t worth him staying. Dispenza says that
that the potential of him getting that salary increase was always there. It was
there even when he was miserable a month earlier. In fact, even if his job
would say no, there still exists a potential situation in the universe where he’d
get a 10% pay increase. Maybe this would’ve been through another job.
Whatever it is you want, the potential is there. The only missing link is whether
we have the ability to ‘observe’, to change our ‘focus’ to look it or not.
Big Idea #2: Live Your Desired New Future In the Present
Dispenza teaches us that our brain doesn’t know the difference between the
internal world (what we imagine in our heads) to what we experience in the
external environment. That is, our thoughts can become our experience. This is
what Napoleon Hill also said in his book Think & Grow Rich. The reason why we
think how we think and do what we do is not that of who we are. Remember,
we only act because of our thoughts. This concept is extremely important
because as quoted above, we can imagine ourselves being someone totally
different. We can imagine a more successful life with more confidence, with
more friends and so on. This is a very similar concept of “The New Self Image”
by Maxwell Maltz in his book Psycho-Cybernetics.
When explaining these kinds of concepts, I like to break it down even more. In
layman’s terms, if you’re able to imagine success and everything that it
involves in vivid details, even down to the amount of money and house
structure. And live that life in the present, meaning living that success right
now in the present regardless of your situations, you will manifest it. For
example if you want to become a millionaire. Think of how a millionaire would
think, act, do, how their house would look like etc. First act in that way. And
you will slowly attract the quantum potential of you being a millionaire into
your life. It’s like, first you have to be a millionaire kind of person to actually
become a millionaire.
Now, I know this may sound very weird and bit B.S. but here are some
examples that you may relate to. Think of manifesting like dating. For example,
imagine your perfect ideal partner in life. You don’t really care about the nitty
gritty of how they look but you have to be attracted to them and they have to
have the same values and be ambitious in life. Now imagine if they existed,
what would they want in their perfect partner? They would want you to also
be established. Be caring. Be funny. All that. So even if you’d meet your perfect
partner in real life, you’d miss your chance because you’re not the type of
person they’re looking for. Chances are even if they’d walk past you on the
streets, you won’t even see or notice them because deep down you don’t think
you deserve them so you don’t look out for them. Hence think of manifesting
like dating. You have to become first, then you will receive.
So applying this concept to the previous scenario with my friend wanting to
earn 100k, if he just acted, and thought of himself as already being a 100k type
of person, asking for that pay rise would be a no brainer to him. Another
example is if you want to become a public speaker – the kind that gets invited
speak on TED Talks. First treat yourself as that kind of person already and you
will slowly see more opportunities to public speak. It’s all about changing our
focus to become better ‘observers’ so that we can attract our goal into our life.
These questions will help you find your desired new future. Also, when you’re
done answering these questions and have a better understanding what your
new desired future looks like. Remember not to live in the future but to bring it
to the present. Live it in the present and feel the emotions, feel the happiness
and feel everything that comes with it. More importantly, act and think like
you’re living in the future but in the present. So when choices comes up and
when situations arrives, deal with them as if the future you is dealing with
them.
Big Idea #3: Three Brains: From Thinking To Doing To Being
We have three brains. The first brain is the Neocortex, which is responsible for
our thoughts. The second brain is the Limbic brain, which is responsible for our
emotions. The third brain is the Cerebellum, which is responsible for our
habitual thoughts, attitudes, and behaviors.
And this is how we learn things. First, we think about the new concept, then
we act on the new concept. Once we act on it enough, we can be the new
concept.
For example, you don’t want to have as much of a temper anymore so instead
you want to learn how to be more compassionate. So you immerse yourself in 
studying compassionate people like Mother Teresa and the Dalai Lama.
Everything on how they think, act and what they believed. Now you know
exactly how to think like them.
The second step after thinking is doing. So a situation comes up where your
partner does something you extremely hate. If that was the old you, you
would’ve started an argument. But since you just studied how to be
compassionate, you start to act compassionately instead. At this stage,
Dispenza explains that the act of doing represents us teaching our body what
our mind has learned. So the first step was for the mind to learn. This second
step is for the body to learn.
But acting compassionate in only one situation doesn’t necessarily make you a
compassionate person. So what you have to do is act it out repeatedly. Only
when you act compassionate repeatedly enough, you’ll move on to ‘being‘
compassionate. At this stage, Dispenza explains you no longer have to think of
being compassionate, you just are. Being is when your body acts without
needing a signal from the mind. It’s natural, routine, second nature and
unconscious.
He goes further to say that to master being is when our internal chemical state
is greater than anything in our external world. That is no matter how many
times someone pushes your buttons or no matter how messy the house looks,
nothing in your external environment can make you get mad since you want to
be compassionate.
And the thing is this might sound foreign to you. As if ‘mastery’ is something
very difficult to achieve. But the truth is, we have attained the mastery level. 
Just not on traits we might like. In fact Dispenza says ‘if you can master
suffering, you can just as easily master joy’ – Dr. Joe Dispenza To demonstrate
this I have to give you this example from the book which I find demonstrates
this so well and at the same time is hilarious.
You probably know someone who has mastered suffering, right? So you call
her and ask, “How are you?” She answers “So-So.” You go on and say “Listen,
I’m going to go out with some friends to a new art gallery and then eat at this
restaurant that has really healthy desserts. Afterward, we’re going to listen to
some live music. Would you like to come with us?” And after a long pause,
your friend answers “No. I don’t feel like it.”
But if she said what she actually meant, she’d say, I’ve memorized this
emotional state, and nothing in my environment – no person, no experience,
no condition, no thing – is going to move me from my internal chemical state
of suffering. It feels better to be in pain than to let go and be happy. I am
enjoying my addiction for now, and all these things that you want to do might
distract me from my emotional dependency.
So guess what? We can just as easily master an internal chemical state such as
joy or compassion as we can and we do for suffering. This also goes mastering
our internal state of thinking we’re not good enough. Which is the most
common internal state most of us have.
Big Idea #4: The Identity Gap
This was one of my favorite ideas from the book. I could resonate with this
idea. Dispenza starts off the chapter by telling us what kind of person he used
to be before all of this. He had the money, he had the job, he traveled around
the world to teach and he had a great family. From the outside, it looked like 
his life was perfect. But even he didn’t know why even having the perfect life
didn’t make him happy. And no it didn’t have anything to do with being
grateful for what he had. It was the fact that there was a huge gap in his two
identities.
Dispenza explains that everyone has two identities: The first is the identity of
how you see yourself. The second is the identity of how you appear to others.
There’s a gap because we usually don’t want others to see who we truly are
inside. So it’s like we put on this front and have two identities. The thing is the
second identity was actually created by us to hide our first identity. But now
and then the first identity (our true identity) comes out and we try suppressing
it further by changing our external world. But what we actually have to do is
change our internal world. Dispenza defines happiness as closing this gap.
The gap was created because we memorized many emotional layers such as
unworthiness, anger, fear, shame, self-doubt, and guilt. Hence our life’s aim is
to close this gap. To really show who we truly are inside. This is what will make
us ultimately fulfilled. Being self-expressed creates happiness. And we can do
this by unlearning and un-memorizing these emotional states.
We can do it the long way as explained in Big Idea #3, but the faster way,
which is to skip from thinking to just being can be done through meditation.
That’s when Dispenza introduces his Step By Step Meditation Guide to do just
that.
Big Idea #5: Breaking The Habit Of Being Yourself Through Meditation
Dispenza explains that one of the main purposes of meditation is to go beyond
the conscious mind and enter the subconscious mind, in order to change selfdestructive habits, behaviors, belief, emotional reactions, attitudes, and
unconscious states of being. That is, we can skip the doing, to go straight from
thinking to being.
The power of meditation actually allows us to become more observant within
ourselves. It allows us to break our emotional bond with the body, the
environment and time. This helps with “Breaking The Habits Of Being Yourself”
and helps with creating new thoughts and emotions that are congruent with
the new future you. We can actually skip the acting part and just move into
being through meditation.
Hence Part 3 of the book includes a step-by-step guide to Meditation. It’s a 6-
week program where Dr. Joe Dispenza shares tools, resources, how to and the
reason behind everything. Unlike other books that only just have concepts and
little action plans. Dr. Joe Dispenza has gone out of his way to explain every
little step and to designing a meditation specifically aimed to have you break
the habit of being yourself. He even includes guided meditations and many
other resources on his website to help best perform this meditation.
Conclusion:
As you can see Breaking The Habit Of Being Yourself reviews concepts that are
quite philosophical. I’ve read many similar books like Psycho-Cybernetics,
Think & Grow Rich, Secrets Of The Millionaire Mind and The Magic Of Thinking
Big just to name a few. They all share one important key concept that actions
and results all start from our thoughts.
Breaking The Habits Of Being Yourself doesn’t just say statements like ‘Change
your thoughts to change your life’, instead it taps into many different concepts
of physics, biology, neuroscience and many others to prove that this is not just
philosophical but instead a fact. A fact that not many people are taking
advantage of.
I guess my last words on this is that if you’re willing to be open minded and
take the book for what it is instead of nit picking every little thing and actually
apply the strategies it shares, I’m certain it will have a positive impact on your 
life. Go ahead, give it a read and break the habit of being yourself to become
the new you.
Your Breaking The Habit Of Being Yourself Action Plan
Choose your top 3 new traits.For example being compassionate, being bold
and caring. Immerse yourself into studying on how to be just that by
researching famous figures who embody that trait.
Act out those 3 traits.Whenever you get a chance, ask yourself “What would a
compassionate person do?” And do this. Do this enough times until you don’t
need to consciously remember to be compassionate anymore. Do this for all 3
traits.
Unlearn your worst 3 traits. Choose the top 3 traits that you don’t like about
yourself. This could also include beliefs about yourself. Beliefs such as I’m not
good enough. To unlearn it, take actions no matter how small to prove that
you are good enough. And when you do, consciously write them down so you
can remember it. Once you build up this bank of examples where you proved
to yourself that you are good enough, slowly your old belief will just fall away.
Of course, you can also do the meditation to unlearn these traits quicker.
However, I’d suggest reading the book first in this case.
Quotes:
“Can you accept the notion that once you change your internal state, you don’t need the external
world to provide you with a reason to feel joy, gratitude, appreciation, or any other elevated
emotion?”
“A memory without the emotional charge is called wisdom.”
“We should never wait for science to give us permission to do the uncommon; if we do, then we
are turning science into another religion.”
“If you want a new outcome, you will have to break the habit of being yourself, and reinvent a
new self.”
“Think of it this way: the input remains the same, so the output has to remain the same. How,
then, can you ever create anything new?”
“The quantum field responds not to what we want; it responds to who we are being.”
“By Itself, Conscious Positive Thinking Cannot Overcome Subconscious Negative Feelings”
Sources:
https://bestbookbits.com/breaking-the-habit-of-being-yourself-dr-joedispenza-book-summary-bestbookbits-com/
https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/18108532-breaking-the-habit-ofbeing-yourself-how-to-lose-your-mind-and-create-a