The intersection of these three literatures leaves the total effect of broadband internet on 
mental health and wellbeing ambiguous. There is some evidence that broadband internet may 
have deleterious effects on mental health (e.g., Donati et al., 2022). However, the evidence that 
broadband internet has positive economic effects combined with the evidence that positive 
economic effects lead to fewer deaths by suicide could mean that broadband internet might have 
positive effects on mental health. The total effect depends on which force predominates. 
Using all-cause mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics, we find that the 
introduction of broadband internet during the initial roll out of broadband from 2000 to 2008 is 
associated with a reduction in the number of deaths by suicide in a county. We find that a ten 
percent increase in the proportion of county residents with access to broadband internet in a year 
leads to 0.11 fewer deaths by suicide in a county, which is a 1.02% reduction in suicides overall. 
As expected, the effect of access to broadband internet on suicides fades after 2008, when rapid 
proliferation began to slow. Nevertheless, when estimating the effect of the rollout of broadband 
internet between 2000 to 2018, we find an overall reduction in deaths by suicide of about 1.6% 
for a 10% increase in access to broadband. In addition, using data from the Center for Disease 
Control’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), we some evidence that
increased access to broadband internet leads to improved measures of mental and physical health 
and less binge drinking, suggesting that improvements in mood is an important mechanism. 
We further find that this reduction in suicide deaths is likely due to economic improvements 
in counties that have access to broadband internet. Counties with increased access to broadband 
internet see reductions in poverty rate and unemployment rate. In addition, zip codes that gain 
access to broadband internet see increases in the numbers of employees and establishments in 
those zip codes. In addition, heterogeneity analysis indicates that the positive effects are 
concentrated in the working age population, those between 25 and 64 years old. This pattern is 
precisely what is predicted by the literature linking economic conditions to suicide risk.
These results provide important support for existing policies that seek to expand broadband 
access across the country. While some measures of broadband proliferation appear to be nearly 
complete as early as 2008, there remains a large digital divide between populations with access 
to broadband internet and those without (Rachfal, 2021). According to FCC data in 2019, 98.8% 
of Americans living in urban areas had access to fixed broadband internet, but only 82.8% of 
Americans living in rural areas had access to fixed broadband internet.3 In some states, the 
percentage of the rural population with access to fixed broadband internet was as low as 63.3%. 
Our results indicate that closing the digital divide can have tangible mental health benefits. 
II. Background 
Broadband Internet, Economic Growth, and Mental Health 
A robust literature connects access to broadband internet and improved local economic 
conditions. These improvements occur along two axes: first, broadband internet affects the labor 
market outcomes of individual workers, and second, broadband internet impacts the behavior of 
firms. These papers then link to another arm of economic research that explores the ways in 
which economic conditions impact mental health. 
Several papers indicate that the internet generally, and broadband specifically, is a useful tool 
for job seekers. Kunn and Mansour (2014) find that internet job searches are effective at 
reducing the length of unemployment periods. This is a contradiction of an earlier study finding 
internet job search to be ineffective, which the authors attribute to the changing nature of internet 
job search between their two study periods. More recently, Zuo (2021) uses Comcast’s Internet 
Essentials program to study the effect of broadband internet access. Zuo finds that the program, 
which was designed to increase broadband access for low-income families, is associated with 
increased employment, increased labor force participation, decreased unemployment, and 
increased income. Similarly, Gurtzgen and colleagues (2021) find that broadband access is 
associated with improved rates of reemployment after the first month of unemployment. These
recent studies are consistent with prior papers as well (Atasoy, 2013; Dettling, 2015; Hjort & 
Poulsen, 2019). Bhuller, Kostol, and Vigtel (2020) suggest that these improved outcomes may be 
a function of improved job searches. Their examination of the roll out of broadband internet in 
Norway leads them to draw three conclusions. First, broadband leads to improved recruitment 
processes. Second, that improved match quality is a benefit to job seekers. Finally, broadband 
internet facilitates better information flow. At the individual level, it seems, access to the 
additional informational and communications resources of broadband internet is beneficial for 
employment outcomes. 