Gallstones
 Gallstones (cholelithiasis) are hardened pieces of bile that form in your gallbladder or bile ducts. They’re common, especially in women and people assigned female at birth. Gallstones don’t always cause problems, but they can if they get stuck in your biliary tract and block your bile flow. If your gallstones cause you symptoms, you’ll need treatment to remove them — typically, surgery.
 

 Contents
 Overview
 Symptoms and Causes
 Diagnosis and Tests
 Management and Treatment
 Prevention
 Outlook / Prognosis
 Living With
 Overview
 Gallstones the gallbladder, along with small intestine and pancreas
 Gallstones are hardened pieces of bile sediment that can form in your gallbladder.
 What are gallstones?
 Gallstones are hardened, concentrated pieces of bile that form in your gallbladder or bile ducts. “Gall” means bile, so gallstones are bile stones. Your gallbladder is your bile bladder. It holds and stores bile for later use. Your liver makes bile, and your bile ducts carry it to the different organs in your biliary tract.
 

 Healthcare providers sometimes use the term “cholelithiasis” to describe the condition of having gallstones. “Chole” also means bile, and “lithiasis” means stones forming. Gallstones form when bile sediment collects and crystallizes. Often, the sediment is an excess of one of the main ingredients in bile.
 

 How serious are gallstones?
 Gallstones (cholelithiasis) won’t necessarily cause any problems for you. A lot of people have them and never know it. But gallstones can become dangerous if they start to travel through your biliary tract and get stuck somewhere. They can clog up your biliary tract, causing pain and serious complications.
 

 The problem with gallstones is that they grow — slowly, but surely — as bile continues to wash over them and leave another layer of sediment. What begins as a grain of sand can grow big enough to stop the flow of bile, especially if it gets into a narrow space, like a bile duct or the neck of your gallbladder.
 

 How common are gallstones (cholelithiasis)?
 At least 10% of U.S. adults have gallstones, and up to 75% of them are women and people assigned female at birth (AFAB). But only 20% of those diagnosed will ever have symptoms or need treatment for gallstones.
 

 Symptoms and Causes
 Christine Lee, MD explains what gallstones are and how they’re treated.
 What are gallstones symptoms?
 Gallstones generally don’t cause symptoms unless they get stuck and create a blockage. This blockage causes symptoms, most commonly upper abdominal pain and nausea. These may come and go, or they may come and stay. You might develop other symptoms if the blockage is severe or lasts a long time, like:
 

 Sweating.
 Fever.
 Fast heart rate.
 Abdominal swelling and tenderness.
 Yellow tint to your skin and eyes.
 Dark-colored pee and light-colored poop.
 What is gallstone pain like?
 Typical gallstone pain is sudden and severe and may make you sick to your stomach. This is called a gallstone attack or gallbladder attack. You might feel it most severely after eating, when your gallbladder contracts, creating more pressure in your biliary system. It might wake you from sleep.
 

 Gallstone pain that builds to a peak and then slowly fades is called biliary colic. It comes in episodes that may last minutes to hours. The episode ends when and if the stone moves or the pressure eases. People describe the pain as intense, sharp, stabbing, cramping or squeezing. You might be unable to sit still.
 

 Where is gallstone pain located?
 Your biliary system is located in the upper right quadrant of your abdomen, which is under your right ribcage. Most people feel gallstone pain in this region. But sometimes, it can radiate to other areas. Some people feel it in their right arm or shoulder or in their back between their shoulder blades.
 

 Some people feel gallstone pain in the middle of their abdomen or chest. This can be confusing because the feeling might resemble other conditions. Some people mistake gallstone pain for heartburn or indigestion. Others might feel like they’re having a heart attack, which is a different emergency.
 

 Are gallstones symptoms different in a female?
 Gallstone symptoms aren’t different in women or people assigned female at birth (AFAB). But people AFAB may be more likely to experience referred pain — pain that you feel in a different place from where it started. So, they may be more likely to experience gallstone pain in their arm, shoulder, chest or back.
 

 People AFAB are also more prone to chronic pain, and they may be more likely to dismiss pain that comes and goes, like biliary colic does. It’s important to see a healthcare provider about any severe or recurring pain, even if it goes away. Once you’ve had a gallstone attack, you’re likely to have another.
 

 What triggers gallstone pain?
 Gallstone pain means that a gallstone has gotten stuck in your biliary tract and caused a blockage. If it’s a major blockage, you might feel it right away. If it’s only a partial blockage, you might not notice until your gallbladder contracts, creating more pressure in your system. Eating triggers this contraction.
 

 A rich, heavy or fatty meal will trigger a bigger gallbladder contraction. That’s because your small intestine detects the fat content in your meal and tells your gallbladder how much bile it will need to help break it down. Your gallbladder responds by squeezing the needed bile out into your bile ducts.