Advanced ceramics are an integral part ofmodern technology. Most of these productsplay crucial functions ‘behind the scenes’ in anumber of applications in everyday life. Theyusually offer superior performance that cannotbe replicated easily by other materials (Riedel,2013). Advanced ceramics today play a keyrole in technologies such as energy and theenvironment, transport, the life sciences, andcommunication and information technology(Greil, 2002). The terminology for defining this type ofceramics differs from continent to continent(Kulik, 1999). In the Japanese literature it’snormally referred to as ‘fine’ ceramics, and inAmerican literature as ‘advanced’ or‘technical’ ceramics (Kulik, 1999). In theEuropean context the term ‘technical’ ceramicsis more frequently used (Kulik, 1999). Afurther classification, depending on the use, iscommon in the UK, where the term ‘technicalceramics’ is further subdivided into functionalceramics to refer to electronic applications andstructural ceramics to refer mostly tomechanically loaded components (Kulik,1999).Advanced ceramics possess uniqueproperties that cannot be obtained inconventional materials, such as highrefractoriness and hardness, low density, lowcoefficient of thermal expansion (CTE), andhigher working temperatures (can maintaingood mechanical properties at hightemperatures). Moreover, there are reportswhich have proven that the cost of producingceramic materials is lower compared to metallicmaterials, and raw material reserves forceramics are abundant (Kulik, 1999).Resources for the production of metals andtheir alloys are dwindling, and thecontinuously increasing demand forengineering products requires alternativematerials to be identified. Over the past fewdecades advanced ceramics have made inroadsin a number of critical applications in everydaylife. It is noteworthy to mention here thatwithout sparkplugs made of alumina (Al2O3)ceramic, vehicle technology would not be soadvanced, moreover metallurgy would not beso reliable without refractories (Kulik, 1999).These are the hard facts behind commonplaceproducts that we normally take for granted.Although ceramics play a crucial role in anumber of technologies due to their uniquecombination of properties, it must be notedthat as structural materials they still face stiffcompetition from cheap metals, alloys, andcomposites (Kulik, 1999). Thus the majorbarriers to the broad application of advancedceramic materials include the lack ofspecifications and databases, high scale-upcosts, and lack of repair methods (Freitag andRicherson, 1998). However, over the years alot of progress has been made to alleviatethese deficiencies through new materialdiscoveries, improvements in properties, andimproved design methods (Freitag andRicherson, 1998).
 

 The term ’advanced ceramics’ was coined in the 1970s todesignate a new category of engineering materials that wereto drive new technologies into the 21st century (Charreyron,2013). Since then there has been phenomenal growth in thetechnological advancement of these materials. A report fromResearch and Markets projected the advanced ceramicsmarket to reach US$10.4 billion by 2021, growing at acompounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of 6.5%(Charreyron, 2013). This growth is attributed to theincreasing use of advanced ceramic materials as alternativesto metals and plastics, with key drivers being the medical,electronics, and transport industries. The analog-to-digitalshift in consumer products has seen massive growth inelectronic device content in a number of applications. Forinstance, liquid crystal displays (LCDs) replaced cathode raytubes and DVDs replaced VHS tapes and players. Thisbasically points to significant growth for ceramic capacitorsand other ceramic electronic components. The largest share ofthe market has always been in the electronics industry,representing approximately more than 70% of production,but positive and negative shifts are expected according tochanges in demand (Kulik, 1999). Advanced ceramics are produced from three main classesof materials, namely oxides, carbides, and nitrides, with asmall quantity accounting for mixed compounds (WorldAdvanced Ceramics, 1966). Japan has been at the forefrontfor a number of years, owing partly to the high degree ofcooperation between companies in investigations anddevelopments (dynamic partnership) and high exportvolumes (Kulik, 1999; Charreyron, 2013). The major volumeof production in Japan is represented by electronic ceramics,accounting for up to 80% of total production (Kulik, 1999).The second largest producer of advanced ceramics is NorthAmerica, where the industry has been driven by massivegovernment financing of research and design development.The main difference between the two approaches is thatNorth America plays a leading role in technology andJapanese companies lead in the applications of advancedceramics. Such approaches have been successfully adopted bya number of European countries that now contributeextensively to the advanced technology market. One suchcountry is Germany, which is home to a number ofcompanies that compete for advanced technology projectsthroughout the world. One of the most significant advances in ceramics research inthe past two decades has been improvements in fracturetoughness, especially for structural ceramics. On acomparative basis, glass has a fracture toughness of 1MPa.m0.5 and most conventional ceramics range from about2–3 MPa.m0.5; steel is about 40 MPa.m0.5 (Freitag andRicherson, 1998). Some advanced ceramics such astransformation toughened zirconia-ZrO2have toughness ofabout 15 MPa.m0.5, which is higher than that of tungsten-carbide cobalt (WC-Co) cermet and cast iron (Freitag andRicherson, 1998). This has dramatically improved theresistance to contact stress and handling damage, thusimparting high reliability and durability comparable to that ofmetals and WC-Co cermets (Freitag and Richerson, 1998).Prior to 1970, most ceramic materials had strengths wellbelow 345 MPa, but nowadays advanced ceramics such assilicon nitride (Si3N4) and toughened zirconia (ZrO2) arecommercially available with strengths above 690 MPa(Freitag and Richerson, 1998).The detailed mechanism of transformation tougheningcan be found elsewhere (Matizamhuka, 2016). However,what is important to note is that fracture toughness values 3–6 times higher than monolithic ZrO2ceramics have beenachieved by transformation toughening. Several othertechniques have been developed over the years to improvefracture toughness of advanced ceramics, such as the use ofmore ductile binders and reinforcement with fibres, whiskers,or second-phase particles. Details of such techniques can befound in the open literature (Matizamhuka, 2016).On the other hand, the high cost of ceramic componentshas been attributed to the lack of large-scale production withminimum losses in the production line. Ceramic-basedmaterials often compete against engineering materials withlower upfront costs, and it is often difficult to convincecustomers to pay a premium in exchange for performancebenefits (Charreyron, 2013). Design, process technology, andmachining technology still need to develop significantly toachieve cost-effective levels of high-volume production,consequently reducing the cost of components. A strategyused by previous market pioneers is that of forward pricingand continued government subsidies in anticipation of futuremarket growth. The recent phenomenal growth in theadvanced ceramics industry could easily translate into agreater market share in future, but this can happen only ifmajor breakthroughs are achieved in fundamental andapplied research (Liang and Dutta, 2001).