According to the EPAR for semaglutide, eight completed phase 3 trials and a cardiovascular
outcomes trial provided safety data relating to approximately 4,800 patients and over 5,600
patient years of exposure. [12] Additional safety data is also available from the SUSTAIN 7 which
assessed semaglutide and dulaglutide. [9]
Adverse events
The EPAR states that “The safety profile of semaglutide is generally consistent with those
reported for other drugs in the GLP-1 RA class”. The EMA noted that the rates of gastrointestinal
adverse events were higher for semaglutide compared to exenatide, sitagliptin and insulin
glargine. [12] However the open label SUSTAIN 7 study found that the frequency of
gastrointestinal adverse effects were similar between semaglutide and dulaglutide groups. [9]
A significantly increased risk of diabetic retinopathy complications was observed with semaglutide
as compared with placebo. This increased risk was particularly marked in patients with preexisting diabetic retinopathy at baseline and co-use of insulin. Although it is recognised that
intensified glycaemic control may precipitate early worsening of diabetic retinopathy, clinical trials
data did not demonstrate a decrease in the risk of diabetic retinopathy over the course of two
years, and data also suggests that semaglutide was associated with retinopathy in patients with
only small HbA1c reductions. [12] A specific warning has been included in the SPC for
semaglutide outlining the increased risk of diabetic retinopathy complications in patients with
existing diabetic retinopathy treated with insulin. [15]
The SPC for semaglutide lists the following adverse events [13]:

Table 2. Adverse reactions from long-term controlled phase 3a trials including the cardiovascular 
7
Date: December 2018
outcomes trial.
MedDRA
system organ
class
Very common Common Uncommon Rare
Immune system
disorders
Anaphylactic
reaction
Metabolism and
nutrition
disorders
Hypoglycaemia
when used with
insulin or
sulfonylurea
Hypoglycaemia
when used with
other OADs
Decreased appetite
Nervous system
disorders
Dizziness Dysgeusia
Eye disorders Diabetic
retinopathy
complications
Cardiac
disorders
Increased heart
rate
Gastrointestinal
disorders
Nausea
Diarrhoea
Vomiting
Abdominal pain
Abdominal
distension
Constipation
Dyspepsia
Gastritis
Gastrooesophageal
reflux disease
Eructation
Flatulence
Hepatobiliary
disorders
Cholelithiasis
General
disorders and
administration
site conditions
Fatigue Injection site
reactions
Investigations Increased lipase
Increased amylase
Weight decreased