Tasers can be deployed in two modes. One of the most popular tasers used in the field—the X26, made by Taser International, Inc.—can fire two probes up to 35 feet and “discharges pulsed energy to deliver a 50,000 volt shock designed to override the subject’s central nervous system, causing uncontrollable contraction of the muscle tissue and instant collapse.” 74 Alternatively, the X26 and other similar devices can be used in “stun mode,” in which the device is physically pressed against a human body to deliver a more localized shock.75 Like all other use of force cases, those assessing the use of tasers tend to be heavily fact-specific from which it is difficult to derive universal principles. That said, a few general trends can be noted. First, the courts have held that the use of a taser is least justified against “nonviolent misdemeanants who do not flee or actively resist arrest and pose little or no threat to the security of the officer.” 76 For instance, in Brown v. City of Golden Valley, a woman and her husband were allegedly pulled over for speeding.77 When the officers reportedly engaged in aggressive behavior, the woman called 911, and refused to hang up when commanded by the officers.78 One of the officers tased her arm and threw the phone on the ground. The Eighth Circuit rejected the officer’s defense of qualified immunity, noting that the woman was only suspected of committing a minor offense and did not pose a threat to the safety of the officers. 79 In another case, the Sixth Circuit held that an officer was not entitled to qualified immunity when she “gratuitously” shocked a man after he had been restrained by police.80 Second, the courts have generally held that the use of a taser against persons who are belligerent or violent is permitted under the Fourth Amendment.81 In one case, a 9th grade student was tased by a police officer after he attempted to punch a police officer after refusing to hand over his portable video game console.82 The court rejected the student’s Section 1983 claim, observing that it was “simply impossible” to say that the amount of force used was unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment. Somewhere in the grey area between active resistance and no resistance are cases where law enforcement used a taser against someone who was passively resisting the officer’s commands. The majority of cases seem to permit the use of a taser for individuals against such passive resisters. In Buckley v. Haddock, for example, the Eleventh Circuit upheld the use of a taser on a man who fell to the ground after being handcuffed and refused to get up after several requests from the officer. 83 After giving the man several warnings, the officer tased him several times. In rejecting his claim, the court put significant weight on the government’s interest, noting that “[t]he government has an interest in arrests being completed efficiently and without waste of limited resources: police time and energy that may be needed elsewhere at any moment.” 84 In another case, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio held that a police officer was justified in using a taser on an elderly suspect suffering from Alzheimer’s disease who had “refused to comply” with the officer’s orders. Once the officer decided to engage the suspect, the court posited, “he had to continue, and it seems the only way he was able to do this was with a taser.” 85 In doing so, the court denied the fact that the age or potential mental illness of a suspect should require a heightened use of force standard.86 Similarly, the Western District of Washington upheld the use of a taser against a mentally ill woman who attempted to drive away from two police officers who were sent to check on the suspect after her mother reported that she might attempt suicide.87 The district court upheld this use of force for two reasons. First, it found credible the officer’s belief that Lowe posed a risk to the safety of the officers and others when she got into her truck, which he believed could have been used as a weapon. Second, the court construed Lowe’s actions as “attempting to avoid legitimate contact by law enforcement.... ” 88 Beyond the level of threat posed by the individual, the courts have taken other factors into consideration including the degree of harm caused by the Taser and how many times it was used in a specific situation.89 For instance, the Eleventh Circuit observed that “[a]lthough being struck by a taser gun is an unpleasant experience, the amount of force [the officer] used—a single use of a taser gun causing a one-time shocking—was reasonably proportionate to the need for force and did not inflict any serious injury.” 90 To the contrary, the fact that an individual had suffered “serious injury requiring emergency medical care” and its multiple applications contributed to a court finding that the use of a taser multiple times was unreasonable.91 Because in the large majority of cases the target of the tasing is not going to suffer permanent injuries, the courts may be inclined to find that such use of force is reasonable in most cases. However, these opinions did not take into account the potential injury—including death—that might be caused by these devices. Other factors taken into consideration have included the vulnerability of the victim, 92 and whether the officers provided a warning to the target before employing the taser. 93 Pepper Spray Like tasers, the use of pepper spray by local police as a law enforcement tool has engendered considerable public attention, including well-known incidents during the Occupy Wall Street protests, 94 and more recently during the protests in Ferguson, Missouri. 95 Pepper spray, or oleoresin capsicum, is a chemical agent used by law enforcement to subdue violent or combative suspects without resorting to higher levels of force.96 The effects of pepper spray include “(1) dilation of the capillaries and instant closing of the eyes through swelling of the eyelids, (2) immediate respiratory inflammation, including uncontrollable coughing, retching, shortness of breath and gasping for air with a gagging sensation in the throat, and (3) immediate burning sensations to the mucous membranes, skin and inside the nose and mouth.” 97 The federal courts have generally been less deferential to law enforcement when using pepper spray on passive resisters than they have been with tasers. In cases in which the individual is only passively resisting—say, simply failing to listen to an officer’s order—the courts have generally held that the use of pepper spray is a violation of the Fourth Amendment.98 Take, for instance, Young v. County of Los Angeles, in which the Ninth Circuit held that the use of pepper spray against a nonviolent traffic offender was unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment.99 Similarly, in Headwaters Forest Defense v. County of Humboldt, the Ninth Circuit held that the use of pepper spray against nonviolent protestors constituted an unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment.100 While these cases disapproved of the use of pepper spray against persons who were passive resisters, there have been rulings upholding such use of force in the course of traffic stops. In Mecham v. Frazier, the Tenth Circuit rejected the plaintiff’s Fourth Amendment claim that a police officer used excessive force when he sprayed her with pepper spray after she refused to leave her vehicle after a traffic stop.101 The court found that the officer’s actions were justified based on Mecham’s “disregard for the officer’s instructions, the length of the encounter, and the implausibility of Mecham’s rationale for not cooperating.” Like the use of tasers, the courts have generally held that an officer’s use of pepper spray is not unreasonable when a suspect is actively resisting arrest or fails to heed an officer’s direct command. In Singleton v. Darby, the Fifth Circuit upheld the use of pepper spray against a group of individuals, including the plaintiff Jeanette Singleton, who were protesting the Keystone XL Pipeline.102 In rejecting Singleton’s Section 1983 claim premised on excessive force, the court held that the use of the pepper spray was not unreasonable because (1) the state had a significant interest in keeping public roads clear; (2) the officer faced an “explosive situation” in which he was greatly outnumbered by the protesters; (3) he provided a warning before using the spray; and (4) pepper spray was likely the least intrusive force available to the officer.103 Finally, like with tasers, federal courts have generally held that it is unreasonable to use pepper spray against individuals who are not resisting and pose no danger to the officer or others.104 