Parents often ask about the effects of violent video games on their
children and teenagers. In most cases, they note that their “common
sense” instinct is that too much exposure to violent video games must
have some sort of negative effect on their children, but that they have
read in the media that “the jury is still out” on violent media effects or
that there is no convincing evidence that violent video game playing is
harmful. Confusion around this conflict will often prompt them then to
ask: “what does the scientific evidence really say?” In this chapter we
show that the common sense view is backed up by a substantial body
of recent scientific findings. Helpful and pro-social video game content
has great potential for enhancing the lives of children and adolescents,
but exposure to anti-social and violent video game content increases
the likelihood of a range of negative outcomes, with greater exposure
increasing the risk.
Video games have been around for nearly 50 years. Kirsch (2010)
notes the first as being Spacewar (released in 1962), a game in which two
spaceships battle to the death in space. Although the graphics were very
simple compared to modern games, the theme of battling to the death
is one that has endured through the ensuing five decades.
According to the most recent comprehensive poll by the Kaiser
Foundation, American children aged 8–18 play an average of eight
hours of video games per week, an increase of over 400 per cent from
1999 (Rideout, Foehr & Roberts, 2010). Playing is heaviest in the 11–14
age group, with boys outplaying girls more than 2.5 hours to 1. A recent
study suggests that around 99 per cent of American boys play video
games, along with 94 per cent of girls (Lenhart et al, 2008). It is common
for US children and adolescents to play more than 20 hours per week
56Chapter in W. Warburton & D. Braunstein (Eds.) Growing Up Fast and
Furious: Reviewing the Impacts of Violent and Sexualised Media on
Children, (pp. 56-84). Annandale, NSW, Australia: The Federation Press.
and it is not uncommon for males to play 40 hours or more per week
(Bailey, West & Anderson, 2010). On average, Australian 7–18-year-olds
played somewhat less than their US counterparts in 2007 (4.7 hours per
week: see ACMA, 2007), but this figure could have risen substantially
in recent years if Australian children have followed the steep upward
trend found in the latest US studies.
The types of games vary, but content analyses by Dill and colleagues
(2005) show that the majority of top selling video games and children’s
favourite games contain violence, and often strong violence. More
recently, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 grossed ~$USD 550 million in
the first five days of its 2009 release, at that time more than any other
entertainment product in history (movies included). Next on the list
in 2009 was Grant Theft Auto IV (GTA), with ~$USD 500 million in
five days. Even more recently (a year is a long time in the video game
world) Call of Duty: Black Ops grossed $USD 360 million in a single
day, breaking all records (Ortutay, 2010). According to Wikipedia, the
massive multiplayer online game (MMOG) World of Warcraft has more
than 12 million online subscribers and thus currently grosses more
than $USD 180 million per month (at $15 per month per player). GTA,
which is rated M17+ in the United States and involves such activities
as going on murderous rampages, having sex with prostitutes and then
murdering them to retrieve the money paid, has been played by 56 per
cent of United States children aged 8–18 (Rideout et al, 2010). Clearly, a
large number of children and adolescents are exposed regularly to video
games with high levels of violence and anti-social themes. This makes
it important for parents, educators and professionals who work with
children to have some knowledge of their effects.
Before turning to the negative effects of violent video games
however, it is important to stress that video games can have many
helpful benefits. Here are just a few.
Helpful effects of video games
Pain management
Kirsch (2010) notes that various media, including video games, can be
used to distract and relax children during painful medical procedures.
57
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
Coordination and spatial cognition
A number of studies reveal that video games which require the place-
ment of objects within a screen (such as Tetris) can enhance the spatial
cognition abilities of players (that is, the ability to mentally arrange
and rotate objects in three dimensions). Indeed, video game playing
has been linked with a wide array of visual and spatial skills, primarily
through practice effects (see Green & Bavelier, 2006; Okagaki & Frensch,
1994; see also Bailey et al, 2010, for a review). In one study by Gopher,
Weil and Bareket (1994), the flight performance of Israeli Air Force
cadets who had been trained on the Space Fortress II video game was
compared with the performance of an untrained group. The trained
cadets performed better in almost all aspects of flight performance and
as a result the game was incorporated into the Israeli Air Force training
program.
Pro-social behaviour
Although this area of study is still in its infancy, there is mounting
evidence that video games which model and involve participants in pro-
social, helping behaviours can lead to increases in pro-social behaviour
in the short and long term. Most notably, Gentile et al (2009) found that
elementary school students exposed to pro-social video games were
more helpful than those exposed to violent or non-social video games.
In a second longitudinal study of Japanese children in grades 5, 8 and 11,
exposure to pro-social video games at the start of the study was linked
with increased pro-social behaviour some months later, even when the
baseline pro-social tendencies of children were statistically removed.
In a final study of Singaporean secondary school students, the amount
of pro-social video game play experienced was correlated with helping
behaviour, cooperation, sharing and empathy. A study by Greitemeyer
and Osswald (2009) found that pro-social video game playing led to a
short-term reduction in the tendency to see the world as hostile and an
immediate reduction in anti-social thoughts.
Education
A considerable literature reveals video games to be a powerful teaching
tool (eg, Barlett et al, 2009; Murphy et al, 2002; Swing & Anderson,
58
growing up fAsT And furious
2008). They have been used to teach algebra (Corbett et al, 2001), biol-
ogy (Ybarrondo, 1984), photography (Abrams, 1986), and computer
programming (Kahn, 1999), to teach children how to manage diabetes
(Lieberman, 2001; 2006) and to teach specific skills using simulators
(for example, by Qantas pilots, NASA and the Air Force). Gentile and
Gentile (2008) describe the educational advantages of using video games
as teaching tools. These include the power of video games to engage
children and to “encourage children to persevere in acquiring and
mastering a number of skills, to navigate through complex problems
and changing environments, and to experiment with different identities
until success is achieved” (p 127).
Exercise
There has been a recent explosion in the popularity of video games that
promote physical activity and exercise (that is, “Exergames”). Games
such as Wii Sports Heart Rate; Wii Fit; Wii Play; Wii FitPlus; Dance, Dance
Revolution and Just Dance seem to be part of a recent trend that has seen
an increase in the availability and popularity of non-violent, helpful
games.
Clearly, video games have considerable potential to enhance the
lives of children and adolescents. Unfortunately, excessive video game
playing, especially of violent video games, has the potential to impact
children in a number of negative ways.
Harmful effects of video games
Video game addiction
In his moving biography, Unplugged: My Journey into the Dark World of
Video Game Addiction, Ryan Van Cleave describes the way that a violent
online game, World of Warcraft, dominated his life to such an extent
that he was unable to function normally and was driven to the verge of
suicide. Video game addiction is now taken so seriously by psychologists
and psychiatrists that it was recently considered for inclusion in the fifth
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders
(DSM) as a diagnosable psychiatric disorder and has been lodged in its
appendix to encourage further research. It is clear that many children
59
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
play video games at a “pathological” level that causes damage to family,
social, school or psychological functioning (see Anderson et al, 2012).
For example, it has been found that 8.5 per cent of 8–18-year-old US
video game players do so at pathological levels (Gentile, 2009). Similar
studies have found figures of 11.9 per cent in Europe (Grusser et al,
2007), 8.7 per cent in Singapore (Choo et al, 2010), 10.3 per cent in
China (Peng & Li, 2009) and 4 per cent for 12–18-year-olds in Norway
(Johansson & Götestam, 2004), with a further 15.5 per cent “at risk”.
As will be seen in the ensuing sections, the amount that children
play video games is very important. Those who play excessively are not
only at risk of a number of negative outcomes, they are also much more
likely to be playing violent games (see Krahé & Möller, 2004).
Attention deficits
There are some studies linking the amount of time children spend play-
ing video games to attention deficits, impulsivity and hyperactivity (see
Bailey et al, 2010; Swing et al, 2010). For example, Gentile (2009) found
that adolescents who used video games at pathological levels were
nearly three times more likely to be diagnosed with Attention Deficit
Disorder or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder than adolescents
who played at non-pathological levels. In a landmark paper, Swing and
colleagues (2010) examined the effect of video game playing on atten-
tion in elementary school children. They used a longitudinal study that
statistically controlled for a range of other factors that could also lead to
attention problems and found that amount of time spent playing video
games predicted increases in teacher assessments of attention deficits
in the children 13 months later. These results suggest that the children’s
level of video game playing played a causal role in their subsequent loss
of attentional capacity.
Anderson et al (2012) believe that on theoretical grounds some
video games should have less effect on attentional problems (for exam-
ple, those that require controlled thought and planning) and that those
which require constant reactive behaviours from players (a common
feature of many violent first person shooting games for example)
may be more problematic in terms of children developing attentional
difficulties.
60
growing up fAsT And furious
School performance
It is well established that spending longer hours playing video games
is linked with poorer school performance for both children and adoles-
cents (Anderson et al, 2007; Chan & Rabinowitz, 2006; Chiu et al, 2004;
Cordes & Miller, 2000; Gentile, 2009; Gentile et al, 2004; Sharif & Sargent,
2006). One explanation for this is a simple displacement of time – hours
spent playing video games eats into time that would normally be spent
studying and reading. For example, in a study of 1491 youth between
10 and 19, gamers spent 30 per cent less time reading and 34 per cent
less time doing homework (Cummings & Vandewater, 2007). It is also
possible, however, that children who perform more poorly at school are
also more likely to “spend more time playing games, where they may
feel a sense of mastery that eludes them at school” (Anderson et al,
2012). Of course, another possibility is the that excessive gaming creates
attention deficits, which in turn can lead to poorer school performance.
Increased aggression
Should we be concerned about children and adolescents playing violent
video games? Can this lead to aggressive behaviour? Over 98 per cent of
paediatricians in the United States have considered these questions and
believe that excessive violent media exposure has a negative effect on
childhood aggression (Gentile et al, 2004). Similarly, there is a consen-
sus amongst the vast majority of violent video game researchers that
too much exposure to violent video games increases the likelihood of
aggressive thoughts, feelings and behaviours, leads to desensitisation
to violence and also leads to decreases in pro-social behaviours and
empathy (Anderson et al, 2010; Huesmann, 2010). There are, however,
a small number of researchers who dispute this evidence and it seems
that the views of this small minority have had a large impact on public
perceptions (Anderson & Gentile, 2008; Dill, 2009). In this section of the
chapter we will broadly examine the arguments for this view and then
review the scientific evidence that does find violent video game effects.
In this way, we hope that readers can judge the evidence for themselves.
1. The first argument against violent video game effects is that there
is little evidence linking the playing of violent video games to very
violent behaviours (such as school shootings). To better understand
61
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
this argument it is helpful to reflect on the difference between aggres-
sion and violence. In essence, violence is aggressive behaviour that
has extreme harm as its goal (Anderson & Bushman, 2002). Thus, all
violence is aggression but not all aggression is violence. With this in
mind we make four points.
(a) Ethically it is not possible to use the most powerful methods – experi-
mental manipulations – to test the causal link between violent video
games and violence because we cannot rightfully incite people to
cause extreme harm in a laboratory. There are, however, ways to
test links with aggressive behaviour, which can be examined ethi-
cally in a laboratory. It is disingenuous to suggest that because there
are no experimental studies that randomly assign children to years
of playing violent or nonviolent video games and then measure
which group commits the most violent crimes, that therefore there
are no established negative or anti-social effects. This is like saying
that because there are no experimental studies on humans showing
that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, smoking is not a causal
risk factor. The causal links between violent video game playing
and physical aggression are, in our opinion, well established.
(b) Cross-sectional (correlational) studies and longitudinal studies
of violent video game effects have established significant links to
violent behaviour. Several longitudinal studies in particular
provide strong evidence that these are causal effects.
(c) Aggressive behaviour, which can include bullying, hurting other
people physically, hurting other people’s property or relationships
and hurting people verbally, is a very important social phenomenon
in its own right. Aggression does not have to escalate into violence
to be harmful and destructive.
(d) No aggression researchers claim that media violence is the sole or
even the most important source of violent behaviour. The most
common approach, and the one taken by the authors, is the “risk
factor” approach. According to this approach, people can have vari-
ous risk factors for aggression or violent behaviour (see Figure 1).
These might include coming from a violent home, having a violent
peer group, high levels of trait aggression, exposure to violent
media and a number of other factors. The more risk factors that are present for a person, especially when they are present from a
young age, the more likely that person is to be aggressive or violent.
Strasburger (2009, p 203) notes that:
The research on media violence and its relationship to real-life
aggression is clear: young people learn their attitudes about violence
at a very young age, and once learned, those attitudes are difficult
to change (Anderson et al, 2003; Bushman & Huesmann, 2006).
Conservative estimates are that media violence may be causing 10%
of real-life violence – not the leading cause by any means, but an
unhealthy chunk that we could do something about if we chose to
(Strasburger et al, 2009; Comstock & Strasburger, 1990).
We believe that Victor Strasburger is right. Many risk factors for
aggression and violence are very hard to deal with as parents, as
educators, as professionals and as policy-makers. Media violence,
though, is one risk factor that can be controlled and about which
action can be taken from the level of the individual home through to
the level of State and federal governments. This makes the research
on media violence effects particularly important.
2. Detractors of the view that playing violent video games increases
the likelihood of aggressive behaviour also criticise the methodology
of video game studies and of meta-analyses of these studies. It is to this
important scientific evidence that we now turn.
Figure 1: Some longitudinal factors for youth violence
Adapted from US Department of Health and Human Services (2001), Bushman and
Huesmann (2006) and Anderson et al (2010).
63
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
What is a meta-analysis and what evidence do the
meta-analyses provide?
A meta-analysis is a statistical technique whereby scientific studies that
test the same or a similar hypothesis (for example, that violent video
game exposure compared to neutral video game exposure will result in
increased aggression) and the same or a similar outcome (for example,
aggressive behaviour) are combined to ascertain the strength (“effect
size”) of the average finding. To date there have been a number of meta-
analyses of the effect of violent video games on aggressive thoughts,
feelings and behaviours. In particular, studies by Distinguished
Professor Craig Anderson and Dr Chris Ferguson have received a lot of
publicity in recent years and it is valuable to compare them.
Dr Ferguson, a vocal critic of the research demonstrating a link
between violent video game playing and aggression, along with video
game industry representatives, claims that violent video game research
is methodologically flawed and that mainstream media violence
researchers selectively report biased findings. Dr Ferguson has also
suggested that Professor Anderson’s meta-analyses have a “publication
bias” that undermines their results. Dr Ferguson cites his own three
meta-analyses that examine the question of whether violent video game
playing increases subsequent aggression. These examined 24, 17 and 14
published papers, encompassing 25, 21 and 15 separate tests of the same
hypothesis respectively (Ferguson 2007a, 2007b; Ferguson & Kilburn,
2009). In total, 4205 and 3602 participants were tested in the first two
meta-analyses (the number cannot be determined for the most recent
study but is assumed to be lower). Dr Ferguson found a positive relation-
ship between violent video game exposure and aggressive behaviour,
with effect sizes of .29, .14 and .15 respectively. He then inappropriately
(according to some meta-analysis experts, see Bushman, Rothstein, &
Anderson, 2010) “corrected” for publication bias using a controversial
statistical procedure called “trim and fill” that reduced these effect
sizes. Such a procedure guesses what unpublished studies might be out
there and adds these guesses to the averaging procedure. Based on the
“corrected” figures, Dr Ferguson concluded there was no effect of violent
video games on aggressive behaviour. These three meta-analyses, which
use highly overlapping subsets of the same small sample of studies, are
64
growing up fAsT And furious
widely cited as the strongest evidence that violent video game playing
does not increase the likelihood of aggressive behaviour.
Evidence that playing violent video games does increase the likeli-
hood of aggression comes from many researchers. Professor Anderson
and his colleagues have themselves conducted a large number of such
studies and have also summarised the available studies in three compre-
hensive meta-analyses, the first in 2001 (Anderson & Bushman, 2001),
the second in 2004 (Anderson et al, 2004) and the most recent in 2010
(Anderson et al, 2010). The latter paper was co-authored by Professor
Hannah Rothstein, an expert in meta-analyses and publication bias.
This paper detailed major shortcomings in the Ferguson meta-analyses
(which failed to include numerous relevant studies) and included all
relevant studies then known. Data from 136 articles, 381 separate
tests of hypotheses, and across a massive sample of 130, 296 participants
were analysed. In this large, all-inclusive meta-analysis, research
methodology was also examined. Among the many findings was that
studies with better research methods tended to find stronger effects of
violent video game playing on aggressive behaviour.
We present a summary of the findings in Figure 2 (over page). We
understand that the concept of effect size is a hard one to grasp without
a detailed knowledge of statistical procedures, so we will provide some
comparison data afterwards to help readers make sense of the results.
The middle bar shows the effect found, the bars on either side reflect
how variable the findings were in the studies tested.
Figure 2 shows several meta-analyses. Each tests a different hypoth-
esis. All hypotheses are tested as outcomes of exposure to violent video
games, and these outcomes include aggressive behaviour, aggressive
thoughts (cognitions), aggressive feelings (affects), physiological arousal,
desensitisation to violence/low empathy and pro-social behaviour.
As can be seen, the average effect across these many studies was one
whereby exposure to violent video games led to an increase in aggressive
behaviours, aggressive thoughts, aggressive feelings and physiological
arousal (which is linked to aggressive behaviour), to desensitisation
to violence and decreased empathy, and to a reduction in pro-social
behaviours.
It is important to note that these findings come from a range of
study types – experimental studies in which all participants have exactly the same experience other than the media type they experi-
ence, correlational studies of the links between levels of violent video
game playing and various types of aggressive behaviours in real life,
and longitudinal studies that follow video game playing patterns and
behavioural patterns in the same people over time.
Each study type makes a unique contribution to what we know.
Experiments can be used to infer that one thing causes another, but it is
harder to generalise these findings to “real life”. Correlational studies
involve “real life” behaviours and can test alternative hypotheses, but
it is difficult to determine the causal direction of relationships found
(that is, whether playing violent games causes aggression or whether
aggressive people choose violent games). Longitudinal studies are real
world studies and can be used to find whether one thing causes another
over time in a person’s life. Some media violence studies have followed
the same people for over 40 years (eg, Huesmann et al, 2003) and have
very detailed data. Because links between violent video game playing and aggression are found consistently across all three study types, the
evidence converges to suggest both a causal link and an effect that is
found in the real world.
The Anderson et al (2010) meta-analysis also found that when
proper statistical methods are used, there was no evidence of systematic
publication bias in the studies. The rather weak evidence of publication
bias produced by Dr Ferguson was likely the result of several factors,
including failure to use all of the relevant studies and the combining of
cross-sectional and experimental studies in the publication bias analysis.
To understand how strong the obtained violent video game effect
on aggression is, it can be helpful to get a sense of what the “effect size”
numbers actually mean. It is easy to understand that a higher number
means a stronger effect, but it is much harder to know how a big a
number needs to be before it is considered important. Figure 3 shows
some effect sizes for well known phenomena that can be used as points
for comparison.
As can be seen from Figure 3, violent video game effects are larger
than the effect of eating calcium on bone mass, of asbestos inhalation
Figure 3: The comparative effect sizes of violent video game
effects and other well known phenomena
* From Best Practices studies, Anderson et al, Psychological Bulletin, 2010.
67
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
on related cancers, of condom use on reducing HIV infection numbers,
of taking aspirin on reducing heart attacks and a range of other very
important phenomena. Clearly, the size of violent video game effects is
large enough to be considered socially important.
A final finding from the Anderson et al (2010) meta-analyses is that
the violent video game effects occurred for both males and females,
and across low-violence collectivistic Eastern countries (for example,
Japan) and high-violence individualistic Western countries (for example,
Australia and the United States). This is not a surprising finding, as other
reviews have found that violent video games affect people regardless
of age, gender, socio-economic status, game genre and game system
(Barlett et al, 2009). In fact, to the knowledge of the authors, no group
has yet been identified that are immune to the effects of exposure to
violent media such as video games (see Anderson et al, 2003).
Perhaps the best brief summary of the evidence presented here
is articulated in a statement produced by 13 researchers into violent
video game effects (including the authors of this chapter), prepared for
an amicus curiae (friend of the court) brief for the Schwarzenegger and
Brown v Video Software Dealers Association and Entertainment Software
Association case in the Supreme Court of the United States (Docket #
08-1448). This statement was supported as being accurate by a further
102 well-respected researchers in this area.
Statement on Video Game Violence
Both the American Psychological Association (APA, 2005) and the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP, 2009) have issued formal
statements stating that scientific research on violent video games
clearly shows that such games are causally related to later aggressive
behavior in children and adolescents. Extensive research has been
conducted over many years using all three major types of research
designs (experimental, cross-sectional, and longitudinal). Numerous
original empirical research studies have been conducted on children
and adolescents. Overall, the research data conclude that exposure
to violent video games causes an increase in the likelihood of aggres-
sive behavior. The effects are both immediate and long term. Violent
video games have measurable and statistically significant effects on
both males and females. Theoretically important effects of violent
video games have been confirmed by many empirical studies. The
effects have been replicated by researchers in different settings and
in numerous countries. The psychological processes underlying
68
growing up fAsT And furious
such effects are well understood and include: imitation, observa-
tional learning, priming of cognitive, emotional and behavioral
scripts, physiological arousal, and emotional desensitization. These
are general processes that underlie all types of social behavior, not
just aggression and violence; they have been confirmed by count-
less studies outside of the media violence domain. In addition to
causing an increase in the likelihood of aggressive behavior, violent
video games have also been found to increase aggressive thinking,
aggressive feelings, physiological desensitization to violence, and to
decrease pro-social behavior.
Importantly, this statement alludes to the psychological processes that
are known to underlie the effect of exposure to violent video games
on children. These are worth examining in more detail because they
also provide some insight as to why the effects of violent video games,
compared to other violent media, may be stronger.
The psychology of violent video game effects on children
Most of the explanations related to violent video game effects involve
different types of learning. Because of certain features of violent video
game playing – interactivity, repetition and the actual playing of the
role of aggressor – the effects may be stronger and patterns of behaviour
better learned.
Imitation
Humans seem to be hard-wired from birth to imitate others. Recently
discovered “mirror neurons” in humans and primates represent one
mechanism in the brain that may facilitate this (Caggiano et al, 2009;
Gallese et al, 1996; Rizzolati et al, 1996; Umilta et al, 2001). Imitation has
benefits, including the fast learning of important behaviours, and plays
a role in human bonding. However, imitation of unhelpful and anti-social
behaviours can have clear negative effects for the individual and for
society. We know that children will imitate aggressive behaviours,
even if the behaviours are totally new to the child and are not seen to
be rewarded in any way (Bandura, 1965; 1973; Bandura et al, 1961; 1963a,
1963b).
We also know that children imitate characters from the media they
see, with some characters more likely to be imitated than others – those
that are attractive, heroic, rewarded for their behaviour or liked, or that
have high social status. In violent video games the central characters
69
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
often meet several of these criteria. Does this mean, though, that people
will copy the behaviours of the characters in very violent games such
as GTA and others? It is possible. For example, an 18-year-old youth
in Thailand stabbed a taxi driver to death trying to “find out if it was
as easy in real life to rob a taxi as it was in the game” (Reed, 2008). As
a result, GTA IV was banned in Thailand. In 2003 William Buckner, 16,
and his step-brother Joshua, 14, killed a man and seriously wounded a
woman shooting at cars in Tennessee (Calvert, 2003). The boys claimed
they were acting out the game Grand Theft Auto III. Also in 2003, Devin
Moore, an 18-year-old from Alabama, killed three police officers follow-
ing his arrest for a carjacking. On being re-arrested he is reported to
have told police that “Life is like a video game. Everybody’s got to die
sometime” (Leung, 2005). Again, the killer told police he was copy-
ing behaviour he had learned playing GTA III. We are not suggesting
that violent video game playing alone was causal in these crimes. As
noted earlier, numerous risk factors influence the likelihood of aggressive
and violent b ehaviour, and the most severe forms of violence virtually
always require the convergence of many risk factors. Furthermore, it is
difficult (perhaps impossible) to identify which risk factors were crucial
to any particular aggressive or violent act. Nonetheless, imitation of media
violence seems to have played some role in these cases.
There are numerous other stories of aggressive behaviours that
seemingly imitate violent video games. These are easily accessed on
the internet with a simple search. Clearly, for some violent video game
players, simple imitation may play a causal role in some acts of
aggression. However there are a number of other factors, also linked with
imitation and learned aggression, that may also be important.
Identification
Although media effects can occur without the person identifying with
any of the characters they have seen, identifying with an aggressor has
been shown to increase the likelihood of adopting aggressive behav-
iours and attitudes (Cantor, 1994; Huesmann & Eron, 1986; Huesmann
et al, 2003). People are more likely to identify with a character who is
perceived as similar, heroic and attractive (Hearold, 1986; Heath et al,
1989), and are more likely to identify with and believe realistic portray-
als because they are easier to relate to personal experiences (Berkowitz
70
growing up fAsT And furious
& Alioto, 1973; Feshback, 1972; Geen, 1975). In violent video games, the
player strongly identifies with (and usually takes the role of) the aggres-
sor. The aggressive central character is usually glorified and portrayed
as heroic and, in recent years, the portrayal of aggressive characters in
video games has become increasingly realistic (Gentile et al, 2007). For
these reasons, identification with violent/aggressive characters may be
a key way that video games impact on children.
Repetition
It is well established that repetition of behaviours establishes them
in memory, increases skill and automates them as learned responses
(eg, Gentile & Gentile, 2008). Further, repeating an entire behavioural
sequence commits it to memory better than repeating only part of a
sequence (Gentile et al, 2007). Violent video games are much more
repetitive than other forms of violent media and more often involve
the repetition of complete behavioural sequences (Gentile et al, 2007).
Players repeat the same behaviours and receive similar rewards
throughout the game, experience similar thoughts and feelings during
those actions and are exposed to the attitudes espoused in the game
implicitly and explicitly (for example, sleeping with prostitutes and then
murdering them to retrieve one’s money in GTA implies misogyny, the
acceptance of violence to get what one wants and that human life has
little value). Simply put, the repetitive nature of violent video games is
ideal for learning aggressive attitudes and scripts for behaviour.
Interactivity
Active participation assists learning as it requires attention, and closely
attending to a task assists people to memorise the relevant behaviours
and knowledge (Gentile et al, 2007; Gentile & Gentile, 2008). Violent
video games are highly interactive, and the recent development of home
consoles that allow players to use realistic weapons such as replica guns
and swords further increases the level of interactivity and decreases the
gap between game playing behaviours and “real world” behaviours.
The combination of interactivity and frequent rehearsal is a potent
one for learning. In essence, this is a key reason that video games are
such powerful tools for teaching pilots, astronauts and soldiers their
core skills. These factors give video games tremendous potential for
71
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
pro-social pursuits and as learning tools, but have less welcome implica-
tions regarding the interactive rehearsal of anti-social and aggressive
behaviours.
Lack of negative consequences
Another basic tenet of learning theory, demonstrated across thousands
of studies, is that people are more likely to behave in ways that are
rewarded and less likely to behave in ways that are punished. In terms of
imitation, children imitate aggression they perceive as being rewarded
more often than aggression they perceive as resulting in punishment.
Interestingly, children will imitate unpunished aggression as often as
rewarded aggression (eg, see Bandura, 1973).
With these facts in mind, it is relevant that most acts of violence in
video games:
(a) go unpunished;
(b) are rewarded (for example, by points, money, status and eleva-
tion to higher game levels);
(c) have unrealistic consequences for the victim.
With relation to the final point, it is important for parents and profession-
als to note that seeing victims suffer realistic and negative consequences
as a result of media violence should reduce the likelihood of subsequent
aggression because pain cues usually inhibit aggressive behaviour
(Baron, 1971a, 1971b, 1979). Also note, however, that in some circum-
stances pain and suffering cues can increase aggressive behaviour (see
Berkowitz, 1993, p 174).
Associative learning
As noted in Chapter 1, the brain is a neural network in which concepts,
ideas, feelings and memories are stored and interconnected. The way
this network “wires up” depends on what people experience, with
paired experiences (such as the smell of fresh coffee, pleasure and a
craving for a hot beverage) becoming more strongly wired together the
more they are experienced together. This means that people learn to
associate one thing with another.
In media generally, and in violent video games especially, many
things are frequently paired and thus become “wired” together. For
72
growing up fAsT And furious
example, guns are rarely used for any purpose other than violent action.
This is why there is a well demonstrated “weapons effect”, whereby
the simple sight of a weapon increases the likelihood of aggression if
the person has mentally paired a weapon such as a gun with killing or
hurting people rather than with a non-aggressive use such as sports
shooting (Bartholow et al, 2005; Berkowitz & LePage, 1967; Carlson et
al, 1990). This suggests that children who often play video games where
there is frequent weapon use for the purpose of killing and hurting
others are more likely to be aggressive immediately after playing the
game and are more likely to be aggressive when exposed to a weapon
of a similar type in real life.
Associative learning also explains why whole sequences of behav-
iour are learned during video game play and why the acquisition of
aggression-related knowledge structures is so important.
Acquisition of aggressive knowledge structures, attitudes and
scripts for behaviour
Clearly, violent video games are powerful teachers, but what is the
outcome of such learning for the individual child? In essence, the child
(and adult for that matter) internalises clusters of associated knowledge
about aggressive behaviour (knowledge structures or “schemas”), as
well as attitudes about aggressive behaviour and “scripts” for how to
behave in certain circumstances.
Schemas and scripts contain knowledge about an aspect of living,
mental links to related attitudes, feelings and memories, and a repertoire
of associated behaviours. Scripts additionally contain information about
how commonly experienced situations “play out” (such as visiting a
supermarket) and the typical sequence of behaviours in that situation
(entrance at the left of the store, grab a trolley, milk at the back, bread in
the second aisle, line up and pay). Schemas and scripts are activated by
a trigger (for example, the supermarket logo) and, once active, help to
direct our behaviour, often without our being aware of it. Children start
to develop schemas about the world as toddlers (and perhaps earlier)
and these can sometimes be aggressive in nature.
In relation to the development of aggressive knowledge structures
and attitudes, there is considerable evidence that exposure to violent
media (including violent video games):
73
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
(a) increases attitudes approving of aggressive behaviour as a
“normal” social response (Huesmann, 1998);
(b) increases mental access to scripts for resolving conflict that
involve aggressive behaviour and reduces access to conflict-
solving scripts that are non-aggressive (Bushman & Anderson,
2002; Huesmann, 1998);
(c) underpins the attitude that aggression is (1) exciting and (2)
increases one’s social status (Groebel, 1998);
(d) increases the belief that the world is a frightening place (Cantor,
2003; Donnerstein et al, 1994);
(e) increases a hostile attributional bias whereby ambiguous but
innocent behaviours by others are interpreted as deliberately
hurtful (Anderson et al, 2010; Möller & Krahé, 2009); and
(f) increases the likelihood of aggressive behaviour (Anderson et
al, 2010).
Regrettably, children are exposed to a lot of violent media. As noted in
Chapter 1, by the age of 18, most US children will have seen many tens
of thousands of murders and acts of violence on television alone. Heavy
playing of violent video games that involve frequently killing of other
people or creatures would add greatly to those figures, especially for
murders. This means that for a lot of children, violent media influences
may result in higher levels of aggressive schemas, fear about the wider
world, hostile and anti-social attitudes, and scripts for behaving aggres-
sively, than might otherwise occur without those influences.
Fictitious violence versus real violence
Recent brain imaging studies, in which children’s brain activation
patterns are “photographed” by fMRI machines whilst they are expe-
riencing violent media, have shown that even when children know the
violence they are watching is fictitious or fantasy violence, their brains
respond to the violence as if there was a real threat (Murray et al, 2006;
see also Weber et al, 2006). In addition, long-term memory systems were
activated, suggesting that this effect could endure beyond the initial
exposure. This research suggests that fantasy media violence seems to
have a similar impact on children as exposure to realistic media violence. The General Aggression Model
The General Aggression Model (GAM: Anderson & Bushman 2002;
DeWall, Anderson & Bushman, in press) provides a theoretically sound
and helpful way of understanding how exposure to violent media can
increase a person’s likelihood of being aggressive in both the short and
long term (see Figures 4 and 5).
The GAM is a model of what is happening psychologically during an
episode of aggression. In essence the person brings their own readiness
to aggress, through their gender, beliefs and attitudes about aggres-
sion, personality and other stable factors. Each situation has cues and
triggers for aggression, such as the presence of a weapon or an insult.
When a person encounters an aggression-triggering situation, various
relevant cognitions (memories, beliefs, attitudes, scripts for behaviour)
are activated, along with feelings (such as fear and anger) and a level
of physiological arousal. Higher levels of arousal make a dominant
tendency to act more likely.
Figure 4: The General Aggression Model
75
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
As a result of these activated cognitions and feelings, and of the
level of arousal, the person has an immediate response. If they are very
aroused or if the situation requires immediate action, this will probably
be the ultimate response. If the person has the time and cognitive capac-
ity for a more considered response they will evaluate their options and are more likely to make a thought-through response. Either way, the
eventual response, which may be aggressive, is enacted, elicits a social
response and the episode is encoded into memory. Once in memory,
it becomes part of the “person” and can then affect their responses to
future situations.
Although “person” characteristics are very important in deter-
mining how an individual reacts in a specific situation, the research
presented in this chapter reveals that most people, regardless of personal
characteristics, are influenced by violent video games. It also reveals
that violent video games provide many cues for aggressive behaviour,
activate aggressive cognitions and feelings, and can increase levels of
arousal. These internal processes can explain why there is also a robust
link between violent video game playing and aggressive behaviour.
Over the long term, exposure to the attitudes, ideas and scripts for
behaviour in violent video games leads to stable knowledge structures,
attitudes, biases in thinking, scripts for conflict resolution and action
tendencies that include aggressive behaviour (see Figure 5). In turn,
these increase the base level of aggressiveness in that person’s personal-
ity and bring the person to an aggression-triggering type of situation
with a higher predisposition to aggress.
Between the two models, it is easy to see how playing a video game
can lead to aggression in the short term, and how repeated playing can
lead to higher levels of aggression in the long term.
Conclusions and advice for parents and professionals
working with children
In this chapter we have detailed the evidence that video games can
be used for a wide array of helpful purposes, but that there can be
many negative consequences for playing violent games, especially when
played excessively. This raises an important question: “How do we help
children to benefit from video games but escape their negative impacts?”
In Chapter 1 it was noted that the “you are what you eat” principle
applies to the way media exposure affects the way the human neural
network “wires up” as well as to food consumption. Using the food
metaphor can be helpful for parents and professionals when it comes
to advising children on how to use media in a beneficial way. Through
77
The impACT of violenT video gAmes: An overview
school education many children are interested in healthy eating and
this can be extended to maintaining a healthy media diet. For example,
children could be told that, as with food, there are media that are good
to consume regularly (in moderation), media that are for infrequent
consumption and media that children should avoid. Helping a child
to self-regulate what they watch and hear in the media can be very
important to a child’s development in this media saturated world. This
may involve:
• educating children about media effects generally and about video
game effects specifically, so that children can learn to make informed
choices;
• helping children to limit their time playing video games;
• encouraging children to play pro-social and educational video
games in preference to violent games;
• keeping video game consoles in public areas and out of children’s
bedrooms; and
• playing video games with your children so that you are aware of
their content and can knowledgeably discuss the implications of
playing certain types of games and screen out potentially harmful
ones.
It is desirable for children to be able use video games for a range of
educational and developmental objectives, but to have less exposure
to the more harmful impacts. We hope that this chapter has helped to
dispel some popular myths about the impact of violent video games
on children and adolescents and has clarified for readers how positive
outcomes might be achieved. A Tragic Postscript
I see MW2 more as a part of my training-simulation than anything else …
You can more or less completely simulate actual operations
These were the chilling words with which Anders Behring Breivik
referred to the computer game Modern Warfare 2 in a 1500-page mani-
festo disseminated just hours before he was responsible for the deaths
of 76 of his fellow Norwegians (Moses, 2011; Shah, 2011; Townsend &
Tisdall, 2011). The 32-year-old male behind the now infamous bombing
78
growing up fAsT And furious
of government buildings in Oslo and subsequent shooting massacre on
Utoya island on 22 July 2011 made no secret of the fact that playing the
violent video games Modern Warfare 2 and World of Warcraft aided
him in preparing and executing his attacks. Breivik identified Modern
Warfare 2 as helping him with “target practice” (Shah, 2011) and
involvement with World of Warcraft as providing sufficient cover for
his preparatory activities (Moses, 2011). As a result of the attacks, one
of Norway’s biggest retailers, Coop Norway, issued a ban of indefinite
duration on these and other violent video games that, at the time of
publication, has yet to be lifted (Narcisse, 2011; Navarro, 2011). When
considering the impact of violent video games, particularly in light of
the Norway atrocities, it should also be noted that video games in which
acts of violence are executed in first-person, immersive environments
have long been recognised and used by the US military forces as effec-
tive in both the training and recruitment of their members (Holguin,
2009; Robson, 2008).