Chapter 3: Remuneration of IMA Work
Question 1: Do you agree with our proposal to pay higher fees for IMB Work? 
Please state yes/no/maybe and provide reasons.
Question 2: We are evaluating the possibility of increasing fees for IMB Work by 
up to 15% compared to the current immigration legal aid fees. Within the range of 
up to 15%, what percentage increase do you believe would be appropriate?
Consultation summary
31. In total there were 38 responses to both Question 1 and Question 2. Of the 38 
responses to Question 1, 17 agreed with the proposal to pay higher fees for IMA 
work (45%), 11 disagreed with the proposal (29%) and 10 responded with ‘maybe’ 
(26%). Of these, 34 respondents went on to provide reasons for their answer. 
32. Most respondents agreed with the Government’s proposal to pay higher fees for IMA 
Work but disagreed with the ‘up to 15%’ fee level and the focus on IMA Work. Upon 
analysis, the overall sentiment of responses was negative (36 respondents, 95%). Of 
the remaining responses (two respondents, 5%), one gave a neutral response and 
another respondent gave a positive response – however no additional comments 
were given.
33. There were many reasons given for why respondents either disagreed with the 
proposal or agreed with the proposal overall but had a negative sentiment. These
have been summarised below. 
Fee level
34. Most respondents agreed with the Government’s proposal to pay higher fees for IMA 
Work but disagreed with the ‘up to 15%’ fee level, with only two respondents (5%)
agreeing with the ‘up to’ 15% rise. A reason given by one of these respondents was 
that ‘lawyers/barristers do very hard important work and should be paid more to 
reflect huge responsibility that comes with doing [IMA] work’. 
35. There were varying views about what fee level should be required, but over half of
respondents stated that 15% is either insufficient or inappropriate, should be the 
minimum increase and/or that the fee level should be higher than 15%. Many 
Legal Aid Fees in the Illegal Migration Act:
The Government’s response to the consultation on fees in relation to the Illegal Migration Act
12
respondents did not provide an alternative rate, but of those that did, increases 
ranged from 50% to 150% – these included that fees should be:
• 50% (six respondents);
• raised in line with inflation (three respondents);
• 50% for regular work carried out under the IMA; but raised to 100% for any work 
that progresses to the High Court or beyond (three respondents); and
• 100–150%: reflective of inflation, and the lack of increases and subsequent cuts 
to fees over the years (three respondents).
36. Of those who said 15% was insufficient or inappropriate, or that a higher rate should 
be pursued, there were a multitude of reasons that formed the basis of this response. 
For example, respondents stated that 15% would not incentivise capacity and that 
increasing legal aid fees by ‘up to 15%’ was insufficient to reflect increased caseload, 
and its subsequent impact on capacity within an already ‘overstretched’ sector. Views 
were also raised that the proposed increase would not be sufficient to ‘address the 
challenges the consultation identified’, especially considering the short timeframe for 
making a suspensive claim (eight days). Another view was raised by respondents 
around the expected complexity of the work.
37. Respondents also stated that 15% higher fees for IMA Work was insufficient because
legal aid rates have not increased, nor been augmented in line with inflation, since 
1996 and furthermore were cut by 10% in 2011. One provider noted that 15% ‘does 
little more than address inflationary increases in costs that providers have had to 
absorb over the last two years’. Some also noted the depreciation of legal aid fees 
over time. Respondents also remarked on a difference in levels of legal aid capacity 
across different areas of the UK as an increasing challenge.
38. However, two respondents stated that an increase less than 15% should be pursued.
One stated that it should be 0% as the Government should move to ‘fixed competitive 
fees’ acquired by chambers bidding. The other stated it should be 3% on the basis 
that legal aid should be a fixed amount no matter the demand.
Scope of fee proposal
39. Some respondents suggested that the proposal should not be restricted to work done 
under the IMA. Eight respondents said that the fee increase should be expanded to 
all immigration legal aid (21%), two suggested that it should be expanded to all civil 
legal aid (5%), and one suggested it should be expanded to all legal aid (3%). Three 
other respondents raised the restrictive nature of the proposal but did not provide 
further detail. 
Legal Aid Fees in the Illegal Migration Act:
The Government’s response to the consultation on fees in relation to the Illegal Migration Act
13
40. Views included that a raise in fees for IMA Work only could ‘encourage a shift to this 
work by providers, away from other essential work that needs to be done’ and could 
lead to ‘perverse’ incentives to undertake this work, to the detriment of other
immigration work.
Additional measures
41. Across Questions 1 and 2, respondents stated that additional measures would be 
required to improve the effectiveness of the 15% increase. The further measures 
mentioned included: accreditation, interpreter fees and disbursements. Some also 
stated that additional measures were needed but did not specify further. Those
responses have been summarised in Chapter 4. 
Wider stakeholder feedback
42. At the stakeholder engagement events, on costs and fees many stakeholders noted 
that the fees uplift should be expanded beyond IMA Work. They also shared the view 
that limiting the uplift to IMA Work could risk shifting capacity away from other policy 
priority areas and aggravate access to legal aid for other migrants. Several 
stakeholders also noted that the 15% uplift is not high enough to increase capacity 
and suggested increasing fees in line with inflation (which amounts to a 100% uplift.)
Other proposals included paying between £150–250 per hour as the adequate 
compensation level that could incentivise providers and help build capacity. 
43. In addition to the roundtable sessions, we also received an open letter from 66 
providers who shared their views about the civil legal aid sector and provided various 
capacity building measures, such as increasing hourly rates for all legal aid 
Controlled Work in line with inflation since 1996 (based on the Bank of England 
inflation calculator, this comes to around £100 an hour). They further called for a 50% 
uplift on work undertaken under the IMA, on top of inflationary increases set out 
above, to enable providers to train new staff and take on this work at pace.