The microprocessor, or CPU, as some people
call it, is the brains of our personal computer. I’m
getting into this history lesson not because I’m a
history buff (though computers do have a
wonderfully interesting past), but to go through
the development step-by-step to explain how
they work.
Well, not everything about how they work, but
enough to understand the importance of the latest features and what they do for you. It’s going to
take more than one article to dig into the inner secrets of microprocessors. I hope it’s an interesting
read for you and helps you recognize computer buzzwords when you’re making your next
computer purchase.
1. Where Did CPUs Come From?
When the 1970s dawned, computers were still monster machines hidden in
air-conditioned rooms and attended to by technicians in white lab coats. One
component of a mainframe computer, as they were known, was the CPU, or
Central Processing Unit. This was a steel cabinet bigger than a refrigerator full
of circuit boards crowded with transistors.
Computers had only recently been converted from vacuum tubes to transistors
and only the very latest machines used primitive integrated circuits where a
few transistors were gathered in one package. That means the CPU was a big
pile of equipment. The thought that the CPU could be reduced to a chip of
silicon the size of your fingernail was the stuff of science fiction.
2. How Does a CPU Work?
In the '40s, mathematicians John Von Neumann, J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly came up
with the concept of the stored instruction digital computer. Before then, computers were
programmed by rewiring their circuits to perform a certain calculation over and over. By having a
memory and storing a set of instructions that can be performed over and over, as well as logic to
vary the path of instruction, execution programmable computers were possible.
The component of the computer that fetches the instructions and data from the memory and
carries out the instructions in the form of data manipulation and numerical calculations is called the
CPU. It’s central because all the memory and the input/output devices must connect to the CPU,
so it’s only natural to keep the cables short to put the CPU in the middle. It does all the instruction
execution and number calculations so it’s called the Processing Unit.
The CPU has a program counter that points to the next instruction to be executed. It goes through
a cycle where it retrieves, from memory, the instructions in the program counter. It then retrieves
the required data from memory, performs the calculation indicated by the instruction and stores the
result. The program counter is incremented to point to the next instruction and the cycle starts all
over.
3. The First Microprocessor
In 1971 when the heavy iron mainframe computers still ruled, a small Silicon Valley company was
contracted to design an integrated circuit for a business calculator for Busicom. Instead of
hardwired calculations like other calculator chips of the day, this one was designed as a tiny CPU
that could be programmed to perform almost any calculation.
The expensive and time-consuming work of designing a custom wired
chip was replaced by the flexible 4004 microprocessor and the
instructions stored in a separate ROM (Read Only
Memory) chip. A new calculator with entirely new
features can be created simply by programming a new
ROM chip. The company that started this revolution was
Intel Corporation. The concept of a general purpose
CPU chip grew up to be the microprocessor that is the heart of your powerful PC.
4. 4 Bits Isn’t Enough
The original 4004 microprocessor chip handled data in
four bit chunks. Four bits gives you sixteen possible
numbers, enough to handle standard decimal arithmetic
for a calculator. If it were only the size of the numbers
we calculate with, we might still be using four bit
microprocessors.
The problem is that there is another form of calculation a stored
instruction computer needs to do. That is it has to figure out where in
memory instructions are. In other words, it has to calculate memory
locations to process program branch instructions or to index into tables
of data.
Like I said, four bits only gets you sixteen possibilities and even the 4004 needed to address 640
bytes of memory to handle calculator functions. Modern microprocessor chips like the Intel
Pentium 4 can address 18,446,744,073,709,551,616 bytes of memory, though the motherboard is
limited to less than this total. This led to the push for more bits in our microprocessors. We are now
on the fence between 32 bit microprocessors and 64 bit monsters like the AMD Athlon 64.
5. The First Step Up, 8 Bits
With a total memory address space of 640 bytes, the Intel 4004 chip was
not the first microprocessor to be the starting point for a personal
computer. In 1972, Intel delivered the 8008, a scaled up 4004. The 8008
was the first of many 8- bit microprocessors to fuel the home computer
revolution. It was limited to only 16 Kilobytes of address space, but in
those days no one could afford that much RAM.
Two years later, Intel introduced the 8080 microprocessor with 64 Kilobytes of
memory space and increased the rate of execution by a factor of ten over the 8008.
About this time, Motorola brought out the 6800 with similar performance. The 8080
became the core of serious microcomputers that led to the Intel 8088 used in the IBM
PC, while the 6800 family headed in the direction of the Apple II personal computer.
6. 16 Bits Enables the IBM PC
By the late '70s, the personal computer was bursting at the seams of the 8 bit
microprocessor performance. In 1979, Intel delivered the 8088 and IBM engineers
used it for the first PC. The combination of the new 16 bit microprocessor and the name IBM
shifted the personal computer from a techie toy in the garage to a mainstream business tool.
The major advantage of the 8086 was up to 1 Megabyte of memory addressing.
Now, large spreadsheets or large documents could be read in from the disk and
held in RAM memory for fast access and manipulation. These days, it’s not
uncommon to have a thousand times more than that in a single 1 Gigabyte RAM
Module, but back in that time it put the IBM PC in the same league with minicomputers the size of
a refrigerator.
7. Cache RAM, Catching Up With the CPU
We’ll have to continue the march through the
lineup of microprocessors in the next
installment to make way for the first of the
enhancements that you should understand.
With memory space expanding and the speed
of microprocessor cores going ever faster,
there was a problem of the memory keeping
up.
Large low-powered memories cannot go as fast
as smaller higher power RAM chips. To keep
the fastest CPUs running full speed,
microprocessor engineers started inserting a
few of the fast and small memories between the main large RAM and the microprocessor. The
purpose of this smaller memory is to hold instructions that get repeatedly executed or data that is
accessed often.
This smaller memory is called cache RAM and allows the microprocessor
to execute at full speed. Naturally, the larger the cache RAM the higher
percentage of cache hits and the microprocessor can continue running full
speed. When the program execution leads to instructions not in the cache,
then the instructions need to be fetched from the main memory and the
microprocessor has to stop and wait.
8. Cache Grows Up
The idea of cache RAM has grown along with the size and
complexity of microprocessor chips. A high-end Pentium 4has 2
Megabytes of cache RAM built into the chip. That’s more than
twice the entire memory address space of the original 8088 chip
used in the first PC and clones. Putting the cache right on the
microprocessor itself removes the slowdown of the wires between
chips. You know you are going fast when the speed of light for a
few inches makes a difference!