In assessing the influence of a loan forgiveness or loan repayment program on an individual’s
employment choice, one issue to consider is whether, in the absence of such a program, the
recipient would have engaged in the qualifying service. Information on the influence of such
programs might be gleaned from an examination that compares the career paths of individuals
who have access to loan forgiveness or loan repayment benefits with the career paths of otherwise
similarly situated individuals without such access. These types of evaluations generally have not
been conducted for federal loan forgiveness and loan repayment programs. However, some data
from one federal program may be instructive.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) examined the career trajectories of loan repayment
recipients in its Intramural Research Program (IRP) and compared them with similar individuals
who did not receive loan repayment under the IRP. The purposes of the IRP’s loan repayment
component is to encourage individuals to complete medical research at the NIH and to encourage
qualified health professionals to continue careers in medical research in general (e.g., at a university). The NIH found that individuals receiving loan repayment benefits were more likely
to continue conducting medical research at the NIH than those who did not. Likewise, individuals
who received loan repayment benefits but then left the NIH were more likely to continue a career
as a medical researcher than those who did not.56 This study suggests that the program may be
meeting its stated goals.
While the NIH study indicates that its loan repayment program may be meeting its stated goals,
the loan repayment program is unlikely the sole reason for at least some of the individuals to
remain in the NIH’s targeted positions. Other research has found that some individuals would
have entered certain fields or taken certain positions in the absence of loan repayments for a
variety of other reasons. If this were true, then the program would not have been necessary and,
therefore, might be considered ineffective. For example, a loan repayment program may be an
effective incentive when jobs are plentiful for recent graduates who are weighing multiple
employment opportunities but may be unnecessary when there are fewer employment
opportunities. In relatively recent years, for instance, law school graduates have had fewer
employment opportunities57 and may take a public interest or government job because of more
limited private sector opportunities. Finally, individuals who accept loan repayment for a specific
job might have taken the same job without loan repayment benefits. For example, one study
found that healthcare providers who practice in rural areas would have done so without receiving
a loan repayment award.58
Although in some cases loan forgiveness or loan repayment programs may appear to be
unnecessary, in some instances there is evidence showing that participants would likely not have
taken a particular position but for loan repayment. For example, the NIH examined its IRP loan
repayment program and found that most loan repayment award recipients had competing job
offers and stated that the potential for loan repayment was an attractive benefit that was unique to
the NIH employment. This was particularly true for physicians who often had competing job
offers at higher salaries. Physicians who received loan repayment benefits were also more likely
to remain in research at the NIH, which demonstrates that loan repayment may be an important
recruitment and retention tool.59
Other federal agencies have found that loan repayment programs are effective at recruiting and
maintaining staff, but there are indications that some aspects of a program’s design may
undermine its effectiveness.60 For example, discretionary programs may have their funding
reduced or cut altogether, thus making the availability of loan repayment benefits to individuals
uncertain. The effectiveness of these programs as a recruitment incentive may be hard to
determine because job applicants do not know whether they will receive a loan repayment award
until after having accepted a job.61 Additionally, loan repayment award amounts may not be a sufficient incentive for individuals to
enter into and remain in certain professions. Some researchers have theorized that loan repayment
programs may be more likely to be successful in meeting recruitment and retention needs if the
financial benefits are sufficiently meaningful to offset a reasonable share of the costs associated
with borrowing to pursue a postsecondary education.62
Similarly, in some circumstances, while the dollar amount of loan repayment benefits may be
perceived as sufficient, additional program design elements such as an individual’s responsibility
to pay federal income taxes associated with receiving a loan payment may make the benefit less
attractive for an individual. Specifically, under the Government Employee Student Loan
Repayment Program (GESLRP), participants are responsible for the tax liability, which some
agencies estimate can account for 39% of the loan repayment amount.63 Some agencies suggest
that this makes the program less attractive to participants than it would be if benefits were
excluded from taxation.64
Another consideration is the short-term nature of many of these programs (e.g., providing loan
repayment benefits in exchange for a two-year employment commitment), which may contribute
to turnover, as individuals may decide to change jobs once they have realized the full benefit of a
program. This could possibly lead to a less stable workforce for employers. For example, some
researchers have found that individuals who have a service obligation have shorter tenures in a
particular position than do individuals who do not have service obligations.65
