Slide 19 - Competitive strength across three axes For the next 8 slides, I am going to take you on a deep dive into the how and the why of WiseTech and CargoWise’s core competitive strengths, differentiators and efficiencies. Firstly, our product’s competitive strength has three distinct axes. As a product-led innovator, we have a long-term strategy of building breakthrough products to revolutionize, not to simply replace. We look to find fundamental flaws, operating problems, inefficient models and incomplete or ineffective processes, and to embed and automate improvements so that we revolutionize the industry’s established model. We have done this very effectively with CargoWise’s international freight forwarding capabilities and the competitive result is clearly visible on slide 26. Similarly, with Global Customs, the Warehouse Suite and soon with the planned release of Container Transport Optimization and ComplianceWise, we are not simply offering a me-too product or a simple upgrade from an aging legacy system, we are providing a dramatically better business model embedded in the CargoWise application suite. In the appendix we outline some of the key business model and product differentiators provided to customers by CargoWise. 15 Secondly, because of the many cost and management efficiencies achieved through CargoWise, we are driving value for our customers across their entire cost base, which I will talk to more in detail on the next slide. Finally, the operating model delivered by CargoWise creates substantial cost efficiencies and global management simplicity. This enables industry consolidation through M&A and the rapid, successful and profitable integration of acquired businesses, whilst also driving competitive advantage and profitable organic growth. 
Slide 20 - Driving efficiencies across our customers’ entire cost base leading to optimized operations CargoWise delivers cost efficiencies in four distinct layers. About 30% of our customers’ total costs sit within operating expenses from legacy IT systems costs and operational labor costs. The remaining 70% of our customers’ cost base is from the direct costs of air, sea, rail and road transport and from surcharges, fines and penalties related to the management of these transport services. Starting with IT cost efficiency, many freight forwarders still have outdated, in-house legacy IT systems built 20 to 30 years ago. They are inflexible, complex and expensive to maintain, and are supplemented at great cost with hundreds of smaller satellite systems, many of which are also legacy systems with their own costs and risks including cyber security. 16 CargoWise customers replace these myriad legacy systems with a single, global, modern, efficient and fully integrated platform that dramatically reduces IT costs and risks. The second cost efficiency involves tackling the labor cost required to deliver the planning, execution and management of the movement of goods from point of origin to final destination. International freight forwarders are asset light services providers. They have large global workforces in each locale, often with a full management hierarchy, managing the local business and processing the local requirements. Many of these procedures are manually executed, often requiring the rekeying of critical data multiple times into many separate, satellite systems. CargoWise provides a single, comprehensive, global system that streamlines and automates many of these procedures, removing much of the original data entry and avoiding rekeying data multiple times. With CargoWise, it is also simple to visualize, plan, manage and control globally from a single location and to move low value work to lower cost locations. Export offices or shared services centers can perform most of the critical tasks including data entry, leaving the often-higher cost import location a much smaller set of tasks. All this allows our customers to extract much greater value by substantially improving operational yield. The third cost efficiency addresses fines, penalties and unwanted surcharges on the movement of cargo. Aging legacy systems have many costs, complexities and risks and can't keep up with the rapidly changing compliance obligations that govern 17 global trade. Because they’re unable to comply or optimize effectively, many logistics providers build in margins or substantial budgets to cover fines and penalties or attempt to pass incidental surcharges on to their customers. The fourth cost efficiency is freight cost efficiency. Given the global scale of CargoWise, and its integration with electronic schedules, rates, booking, tracking, job costing and account settlement, CargoWise customers are able to acquire and optimize transport services much more efficiently than ever before, improving freight utilization, negotiating better rates with carriers, optimizing packing and movement, and allowing economies of scale, to become more price competitive, and improve unit economics and the value delivered to their customers. By creating substantial cost benefits over time, through these four layers of cost improvements, customers also consume more CargoWise services, which drives ongoing long-term revenue growth for WiseTech.
