Wisdom tooth removal — or wisdom tooth extraction — is a common oral surgery procedure. Dentists may recommend this treatment to preserve your oral health and protect your other teeth from possible issues in the future.
 

 Your wisdom teeth — also called third molars — are in the very back of your mouth. Typically, they erupt (grow in) sometime between the ages of 17 and 25.
 

 Scientists believe wisdom teeth are vestigial structures (parts of the human body that are no longer necessary). Our ancestors needed these teeth to crush and chew raw leaves, nuts, roots and meat. Today, we eat more cooked food and use forks and knives to cut our food up into smaller pieces. As a result, we don’t really need wisdom teeth anymore.
 

 Some people have all four wisdom teeth (one in each quadrant — the upper left, lower left, upper right and lower right). Others may have one, two, three or none at all. No matter how many wisdom teeth you do (or don’t) have, it doesn’t mean there’s something wrong. It’s just a variation of normal and a sign of the ever-changing evolutionary process.
 

 

 You might need wisdom teeth removed if you:
 

 Have one or more impacted wisdom teeth. (“Impacted” means partially or fully trapped in your gums or jawbone.)
 Have wisdom teeth that grew in crooked or sideways.
 Develop pain near the back of your mouth.
 Trap food and debris around your wisdom teeth.
 Develop gum disease, particularly around your molars.
 Have tooth decay (cavities) in a partially erupted wisdom tooth.
 Develop a cyst (fluid-filled sac) around one or more wisdom teeth.
 Have damage to nearby teeth or surrounding bone.
 In many cases, dentists recommend wisdom teeth extraction as a preventive measure. As a result, your dentist may suggest removing your wisdom teeth even if you don’t have any symptoms. This can help reduce your risk for future problems, including infection and tooth decay.
 

 

 How should I prepare for wisdom teeth removal?
 During a consultation with an oral surgeon, they’ll check the health of your wisdom teeth and take dental X-rays to determine their exact location. This is a good time to tell your surgeon about any medications, vitamins or supplements you’re currently taking.
 

 

 The day of your procedure, your surgeon will:
 

 Give you anesthesia to numb your teeth and gums and keep you comfortable. (If you choose sedation, they’ll give you sedative medications, as well.)
 Make incisions (cuts) in your gums, if necessary, to expose teeth trapped in your gums or jawbone.
 Carefully loosen your wisdom tooth and lift it from its socket. (They may need to divide your tooth into sections for easier removal.)
 Clean the area to make sure there’s no infection.
 Place stitches to close the surgical site, if necessary.
 Place gauze over the sockets to slow bleeding.
 How long does this procedure take?
 Wisdom tooth extraction usually takes an hour or less. Complex cases may take longer.
 

 What happens after wisdom teeth removal?
 After wisdom teeth removal, you can expect mild discomfort, slight bleeding and swelling. Your oral surgeon will give you instructions for wisdom teeth management to ease these side effects. Once your sedation wears off enough, a trusted friend or family member will drive you home.
 

 Dos and don’ts after wisdom tooth extraction
 Your surgeon will give you postoperative guidelines specific for your situation. Following these instructions will help you manage bleeding, swelling and pain after your procedure.
 

 

 DO:
 

 Leave gauze in place for about 30 minutes after your surgery. Replace with clean gauze if necessary. Your surgeon can tell you when to stop using gauze after wisdom tooth extraction. But in general, you can take it out when the bleeding slows. It’s normal to have some oozing, but you shouldn’t have excessive bleeding.
 Rest as much as you can. You should stay at home and recover for at least three to five days. If you have a physically demanding job, you might need to wait longer before returning to work.
 Use an ice pack to help reduce swelling. Wrap the ice pack in a clean towel and place it on your face. Leave it on for 20 minutes, and then take it off for 20 minutes. Repeat several times a day.
 Keep extraction sites clean. Gently soak the surgical areas with alcohol-free antibacterial mouthwash. Don’t swish. Swishing can dislodge blood clots and cause dry sockets, a painful condition that exposes the bone at your extraction site. Instead, lean your head to each side and let the mouthwash soak the areas.
 Brush and floss the rest of your teeth every day. While you don’t want to brush over the extraction sites, you’ll still need to keep your other teeth clean during recovery. This reduces your risk for infection.
 Take all medications as prescribed. Your surgeon will give you medications to keep you comfortable and reduce your risk of infection. Don’t stop taking these medications until your surgeon says it’s OK.
 DON’T:
 

 Drink through a straw. This dislodges blood clots and causes dry sockets.
 Exercise until your surgeon says it’s OK. Getting your heart rate up increases your risk for pain, bleeding and swelling. Most people can resume their fitness routines in about 48 to 72 hours.
 Lift heavy things. Heavy lifting also increases your risk for postoperative complications like pain, bleeding and swelling.
 Eat hard, crunchy or chewy foods. These can damage your healing gums and cause pain.
 Drink carbonated beverages or beverages containing alcohol. These beverages can dislodge blood clots and cause dry sockets. Skip these drinks for at least five days.
 

 Wisdom tooth removal can reduce your risk for future oral health problems, like:
 

 Gum disease.
 Tooth decay.
 Damage to neighboring teeth.
 Bone loss.
 Jaw damage.
 If you’ve already developed pain because of your wisdom teeth, then extraction can often ease discomfort almost immediately and get you back on track to better oral health.
 

 

 Wisdom teeth removal usually doesn’t result in long-term complications. In rare instances, people may develop:
 

 Infection (pus coming out of your socket or incisions).
 Dry sockets (loss of blood clot resulting in exposed bone).
 Damage to other oral structures, including your jawbone, nerves, sinuses or nearby teeth.
 Recovery and Outlook
 How long does it take to recover after wisdom teeth removal?
 Wisdom teeth removal recovery time takes one to two weeks on average. But most people can resume school, work and other routines in about three to five days. Your surgeon will give you detailed postoperative instructions to help keep you comfortable while you heal.
 

 

 In general, eat a soft food diet for the first three to five days. Avoid hard, crunchy or chewy foods, as these can cause pain and interfere with healing.
 

 Your surgeon will give you a list of things you can eat after wisdom tooth extraction. Some of these foods include:
 

 Yogurt.
 Smoothies.
 Pudding.
 Soups.
 Macaroni and cheese.
 Scrambled eggs.
 Applesauce.
 Mashed potatoes.
 Cottage cheese.
 Pureed fruit.
 Cooked vegetables.
 When can I go back to work or school?
 You’ll need to rest at home for three to five days after wisdom tooth removal. Most people can resume work, school and other routines at this point.
 

 

 Call your dentist or oral surgeon if you develop:
 

 A fever higher than 102 degrees Fahrenheit (38.8 degrees Celsius).
 Excessive bleeding.
 Severe pain that doesn’t get better with medication.
 Difficulty breathing or swallowing.
 Swelling that gets worse after three days.
 An infection (pus) coming from your surgical site.
 Additional Details