Current Pharmacologic Options
 There are 3 antibiotics available for treatment of CDI: metronidazole, vancomycin, and fidaxomicin. All have demonstrated efficacy with similar rates of cure in nonsevere disease [18]. However, use of fidaxomicin, with a narrower spectrum of antimicrobial activity, has been shown to result in lower recurrence rates [19]. Based on this benefit, the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) clinical practice guidelines position fidaxomicin above vancomycin for treatment of an initial CDI [20]. The guidelines published by the American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) differ, stating that either vancomycin or fidaxomicin is appropriate to treat an initial CDI [21]. This recommendation was based on comparable efficacy data with far lower costs of vancomycin compared with fidaxomicin.
 

 In severe infections, treatment with metronidazole was shown to be associated with increased 30-day mortality [22]. In addition, C. difficile isolates with reduced susceptibility to metronidazole and treatment failures with this agent are increasing [23]. Therefore, use of metronidazole to treat patients with severe disease or those who are older or have comorbidities is not recommended by either practice guideline, though ACG guidelines maintain that metronidazole is appropriate to treat nonsevere infections in younger patients without comorbidities. SHEA/IDSA guidelines discourage its use altogether.
 

 Bezolotoxumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to toxin B and has been shown to reduce CDI recurrence in patients at high risk of recurrence [24]. Neutralization of the toxin while the antibody remains in circulation may prevent symptoms in the event of C. difficile regrowth after completion of antibiotic therapy. There are significant drug and infusion costs to use of this agent, and clinical trials demonstrated a number needed to treat of 10 to prevent 1 recurrent CDI. The Gastroenterology Society treatment guidelines recommend considering use of this agent for patients in whom the observed clinical benefits were greatest, including those aged ≥65 years with at least 1 of the following additional risk factors: experiencing their second episode of CDI within the past 6 months, immunocompromised, or with severe CDI [21]. SHEA/IDSA guidelines similarly recommend use be reserved for patients with risk factors for recurrence.
 

 Fecal Microbiota Transplantation: History and Current Status
 FMT has emerged as a safe and effective therapy for CDI and is now recommended in treatment guidelines after a second recurrence [21]. Initially described by the surgeon Ben Eiseman as a treatment for pseudomembranous enterocolitis in 1958 [25] with several additional successful case reports over the years [26], it was viewed as a treatment of “last resort” until rising numbers of severe and recurrent cases of C. difficile in the early 2000s. A 2004 publication by gastroenterologist Thomas Borody promoted the use of screened donor stool as “bacteriotherapy” for CDI and other gastrointestinal conditions [27]. Interest in the treatment began to gain momentum, yet through 2008, only 100 patients comprised the world's literature of recurrent CDI treated with bacteriotherapy [28].
 

 In 2010, Yoon et al reported 100% success in 12 patients treated with donor stool administered during colonoscopy [29], and this method was rapidly adopted by other gastroenterologists as a well-tolerated and effective method. By 2012, other investigators were reporting similar high rates of cure using the colonoscopic approach in larger case series [30, 31], and the first long-term follow-up study supported the treatment as durable and safe [32]. Mechanisms of effect were also being investigated with 16s rRNA sequencing to characterize recipient's stool before and after the procedure and showed dramatic effects on the composition of the gut microbiome [33]. In the interest of standardizing the approach to donor selection and screening and administration protocols, a multidisciplinary working group was formed. This group, comprised of gastroenterologists and infectious diseases specialists, coined the term “fecal microbiota transplant” and published the first guidance for clinicians [34]. In January 2013, results from the first randomized, controlled trial of FMT for treatment of recurrent CDI were reported [35]. This landmark Dutch study was stopped at the interim analysis after duodenal infusion of a preparation of donor feces was found to be far superior to standard-of-care oral vancomycin in preventing further CDI recurrence. This study was widely publicized, increasing awareness among patients and members of the medical community and reassuring physicians about the efficacy and safety of the procedure (Figure 1).
 

 Prompted by growing interest in FMT for CDI and other applications, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) convened a public workshop in 2013 titled “Fecal Microbiota for Transplantation” with the purpose of exchanging information with the medical and scientific communities about the regulatory and scientific issues associated FMT. Clinicians, scientists, and patient advocates were invited to speak and present data on the gut microbiome, the epidemiology and treatment of recurrent CDI and its impact on patients, and FMT for CDI. At the meeting’s conclusion, it was announced that the FDA intended to regulate fecal microbiota as a biologic drug. As such, it was unapproved, and an investigational new drug (IND) application would be required to administer or conduct clinical trials on FMT. In subsequent communications, physicians and scientists expressed concern that the IND requirement was burdensome to physicians and would adversely affect the availability of FMT to patients who were suffering with recurrent CDI. In acknowledgment of these concerns, the FDA announced the policy of “enforcement discretion,” which permitted FMT to be done for patients suffering from CDI who had not responded to standard therapies, provided they were given informed consent stating that FMT is investigational and discussing potential risks [36].
 

 Around this time, OpenBiome, a nonprofit stool bank founded by a team of physicians, microbiologists, and public health experts, was established and began to provide screened donor material for FMT. Operating under enforcement discretion, OpenBiome centralized the process of donor testing, stool donation, and processing and shipped preparations of frozen donor material to clinicians for use in FMT. With extensive donor health screenings and serologic and stool testing, infection transmission risk was minimized. With this convenient source of donor stool, FMT was facilitated; by 2018, OpenBiome had shipped 10 000 doses and partnered with investigators to conduct research around FMT and the gut microbiome. The widespread adoption of stool banks was not anticipated by FDA, and members of industry argued that the availability of donor stool under enforcement discretion was impacting enrollment in clinical trials of live biotherapeutic products. In response, the agency issued a draft guidance in 2016 that would require stool banks to adhere to IND requirements in order to distribute FMT products [37]. This would remain in draft form for several years while public comments were elicited and LBPs for treatment of CDI remained in clinical development.
 

 Gastroenterologists continued to work with collaborators from other disciplines to contribute to discoveries and innovation in the field, and the years 2013 through 2019 saw great advances in knowledge around FMT. A multicenter, retrospective series on the use of FMT in immunocompromised recipients demonstrated the effective use of FMT for CDI in this population with few serious adverse events and no related infectious complications in these high-risk patients [38]. Additional series showed the effectiveness for CDI in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [39–41], solid organ transplant recipients [42], and elderly individuals [43] and examined factors predictive of FMT failure [44]. The first placebo-controlled trial of colonoscopically administered FMT was published in 2016 [45]. This study enrolled 46 patients with multiple recurrent CDI. Patients were randomized after completing a course of oral vancomycin to treat the most recent episode and received FMT using donor stool or autologous FMT (as placebo). In the intention-to-treat analysis, 20 of 22 patients (90.9%) in the donor FMT group achieved clinical cure at 8 weeks compared with 15 of 24 (62.5%) in the autologous FMT group (P = .042).