1) A BRIEF HISTORY OF NEUROSCIENCE
Humans have long been interested in exploring the nature of mind. The long history of 
their enquiry into the relationship between mind and body is particularly marked by 
several twists and turns. However, brain is the last of the human organs to be studied in 
all seriousness, more particularly its relation with human mind.
Around 2000 BC and for long since that time the Egyptians did not think highly of the 
brain. They would take out the brain via the nostrils and discarded it away before 
mummifying the dead body. Instead, they would take great care of the heart and other 
internal organs. However, a few Egyptian physicians seemed to appreciate the 
significance of the brain early on. Certain written records have been found where 
Egyptian physicians had even identified parts and areas in the brain. Besides, Egyptian 
papyrus, believed to have been written around 1700 BC, carried careful description of the 
brain, suggesting the possibility of addressing mental disorders through treatment of the 
brain. That is the first record of its kind in the human history (Figure 1).
The Greek mathematician and philosopher, Plato (427-347) believed that the brain was 
the seat of mental processes such as memory and feelings (Figure 2). Later, another 
Greek physician and writer on medicine, Galen (130-200 AD) too, believed that brain 
disorders were responsible for mental illnesses. He also followed Plato in concluding that 
the mind or soul resided in the brain. However, Aristotle (384-322 BC), the great 
philosopher of Greece at that time, restated the ancient belief that the heart was the 
superior organ over the brain (Figure 3). In support of his belief, he stated that the brain 
was just like a radiator which stopped the body from becoming overheated, whereas the 
heart served as the seat of human intelligence, thought, and imagination, etc. 
 
Medieval philosophers felt that the brain was constituted of fluid-filled spaces called 
ventricles where the ‘animal spirits’ circulated to form sensations, emotions, and 
memories. This viewpoint brought about a shift in the previously held views and also 
provided the scientists with the new idea of actually looking into the brains of the humans 
and animals. However, no such ventricles as claimed by them were found upon 
examination nor did the scientists find any specific location for the self or the soul in the 
brain.
In the seventeenth century, the French philosopher Rene Descartes (1596-1650) 
described mind and body as separate entities (Figure 4) yet they interacted with each 
other via the pineal gland, the only structure not duplicated on both sides of the brain. He 
maintained that the mind begins its journey from the pineal gland and circulates the rest 
of the body via the nerve vessels. His dualist view influenced the mind-body debate for 
Page 4 of 35
the next two centuries. However, through the numerous experiments undertaken in the 
19th century, the scientists gathered evidences and findings which all emboldened the 
scientists to claim that the brain is the center of feelings, thoughts, self and behaviors.
Just to give an example of the kind of experiments performed on a particular physical 
activity which pointed to the brain as the regulator of bodily actions, imagine activating a 
particular area of the brain through electrical stimulus, you would actually see it 
effectively impacting a corresponding body-part, say the legs by making them move. 
Through findings such as these as well as others, we have come of know also of the 
special activities of the electrical impulses and chemicals in the brain.
Explorations continued into the later centuries and, by the middle of 20th century, human 
understanding of the brain and its activities have increased manifold. Particularly, 
towards the end of twentieth century, with further improvement in imaging technologies 
enabling the researchers to undertake investigation on functioning brains, the scientists 
were deeply convinced that the brain and the rest of the nervous systems monitored and 
regulated emotions and bodily behaviors (Figures 5 & 6). Since then, the brain together 
with the nervous system have become the center of attention as the basis of mental 
activities as well as physical behaviors, and gradually a separate branch of science called 
neuroscience focusing specifically on the nervous systems of the body has evolved in the 
last 40 so years.
To better understand modern neuroscience in its historical context, including why the 
brain and nervous system have become the center of attention in the scientific pursuit of 
understanding the mind, it is useful to first review some preliminary topics in the 
philosophy of science. Science is a method of inquiry that is grounded in empirical 
evidence. Questions about the unknown direct the path of science as a method. Each 
newly discovered answer opens the door to many new questions, and the curiosity of 
scientists motivates them to answer those unfolding questions. When a scientist 
encounters a question, she or he develops an explanatory hypothesis that has the potential 
to answer it. But it is not enough to simply invent an explanation. To know if an 
explanation is valid or not, a scientist must test the hypothesis by identifying and 
observing relevant, objectively measurable phenomena. Any hypothesis that cannot be 
tested in this way is not useful for science. A useful hypothesis must be falsifiable, 
meaning that it must be possible to ascertain, based on objective observations, whether 
the hypothesis is wrong and does not explain the phenomena in question. If a hypothesis 
is not falsifiable, it is impossible to know whether it is the correct explanation of a 
phenomenon because we cannot test the validity of the claim.
Why does the scientific method rely only on objective observations? Science is a team 
effort, conducted across communities and generations over space and time. For a 
hypothesis to be accepted as valid, it must be possible for any interested scientist to test 
it. For example, if we want to repeat an experiment that our colleague conducted last 
year, we need to test the hypothesis under the same conditions as the original experiment. 
This means it must be possible to recreate those conditions. The only way to do this in a 
precise and controlled manner is if the scientific method relies on empirical evidence. 
Page 5 of 35
Furthermore, conclusions in science are subject to peer review. This means that any 
scientist’s colleagues must be able to review and even re-create the procedures, analyses, 
and conclusions made by that scientist before deciding if the evidence supports the 
conclusions. Because we don’t have access to the subjective experiences of others, it is 
not possible to replicate experiments that are grounded in subjectivity because we cannot 
recreate the conditions of such an experiment, nor can we perform identical analyses of 
subjective phenomena across people. No matter how many words we use, we cannot 
describe a single subjective experience accurately enough to allow another person to 
experience it the same way. Consequently, we cannot have a replicable experiment if the 
evidence is not objective.
Therefore, two necessary features of a scientific hypothesis are the potentials to falsify 
and replicate it. And both of these requirements are dependent on objectively measurable 
evidence. This is why we began with the claim that science is a method of inquiry that is 
grounded in empirical evidence.
Neuroscience is a scientific discipline like any other, in that the focus of investigation is 
on objectively measurable phenomena. But unlike most other sciences, this poses a 
particularly challenging problem for neuroscience. How do we investigate the mind, 
which is subjective by nature, if empirical evidence is the only valid form of data to 
support a conclusion in science? The relationship between the mind and the body has 
become known as the “mind-body problem” in modern neuroscience and Western 
philosophy of mind, because there is a fundamental challenge to explain the mind in 
objective terms. Scientists view this relationship as a problem because their method of 
inquiry investigates phenomena from a third-person (he, she, it, they) perspective, while 
the subjective experience of the mind has a first-person (I, we) perspective. The mindbody problem has been a central, unresolved topic in Western philosophy of mind for 
centuries, and is a topic we will discuss in more detail in a later chapter of this textbook 
when we explore the neuroscience of consciousness.
For now we can start simply by stating that the majority of scientists, including 
neuroscientists, hold the philosophical view that all phenomena are caused by physical 
processes, including consciousness and its related mental phenomena. This view might be 
proven wrong as inquiry proceeds, but is taken as the most simple (or parsimonious) 
starting point. Science uses the principle of parsimony, of starting with simple rather than 
complex explanations, as a way to facilitate production of falsifiable hypotheses: more 
complex explanations are built up as evidence accumulates and more simple explanations 
are excluded. Modern neuroscience investigates the brain and nervous system based on 
the working assumption that the objective physical states of those biological systems are 
the cause of the subjective mental states of the organism that has those biological 
systems. In other words, when you smell a fresh flower, taste a cup of chai, listen to the 
birds, feel the wind on your cheek, and see the clouds in the sky, those subjective 
experiences are caused by the momentary physical processes in your body, nervous 
system, and brain interacting with the physical environment. Under this philosophical 
view, then, mental states correlate with physical states of the organism, and by 
investigating those physical states scientists can understand the nature of those mental 
Page 6 of 35
states. So while this might seem counterintuitive based on the Buddhist method of 
inquiry, for a neuroscientist it is obvious to begin the investigation by focusing on 
physical phenomena; on the empirical evidence. Neuroscientists often equate the “neural 
correlates” of consciousness as consciousness itself. We will explore in more depth the 
relationship between form and function between the body and mind later in the textbook, 
as well as the philosophical view of materialism in neuroscience.
It will also be helpful to introduce some basic concepts in neuroscience before exploring 
topics in more detail. The primary goal in this year of the neuroscience curriculum is that 
you become familiar with the brain and nervous system. The human brain is the most 
complex and extraordinary object known to all of modern science. Because of this 
immense complexity, it can be very challenging to encounter neuroscience in an 
introductory course such as this one. So patience is an important part of the learning 
process. First, neuroscience is still very much in its infancy as a scientific discipline, and 
there are vastly more questions than there are answers. Second, it can be a challenge for 
new students of neuroscience to simultaneously learn the details of the basic concepts 
while understanding and appreciating the broader conclusions. It’s like learning a 
language while also reading the literature of that language! Neuroscience is a scientific 
discipline with many different levels of exploration and explanation. Therefore, it is 
important for you to pay attention to the level at which are we speaking when you learn 
new concepts. For example, the brain and nervous system are made up of cells called 
neurons or nerve cells, which we will discuss in detail in Chapter 4. Neurons connect 
with each other to form complex networks, and from those different patterns of 
connection emerge different phenomena (such as a thought or a sensation) in the brain 
and ultimately in the mind. This may sound confusing at the moment, but we will explore 
these topics in more detail in later chapters. In neuroscience, levels of explanation can 
span from very low levels such as the molecular mechanisms involved in the neuron 
cells, to middle levels such as particular networks of neurons in the brain, to very high 
levels such as how humans engage in thoughts, speech, and purposeful actions.
The brain is the bodily organ that is the center of the nervous system. But it might 
surprise you to learn that not all animals that have neurons have a brain! For example, 
jellyfish have neurons, but they don’t have a brain. Jellyfish are very simple organisms 
that live in the ocean, and their neurons allow them to sense some basic information 
about their environment. But because they don’t have a brain to process that 
environmental information, they can only react to their immediate environment. Without 
a brain, jellyfish cannot think, make plans for the future, have memories of the past, or 
make decisions. Their behavior is limited to reactions and reflexes. Complex networks of 
neurons in the human brain are the physiological substrates that support what we 
experience as human beings. But we are not the only species with a brain. Later in this 
textbook we will explore the relationship between brain complexity and behavior across 
species.
For organisms that have a brain, information can flow along the complex networks of 
neurons in different ways. Some networks, also called pathways or systems, flow from 
the sensory organs to the brain, while others flow from the brain to the muscles of the 
Page 7 of 35
body. Afferent neurons, also called sensory neurons or receptor neurons, communicate 
information from the sensory organs to the brain. Efferent neurons, also called motor 
neurons, communicate information from the brain to the muscles of the body. 
Interneurons, also called association neurons, communicate information between neurons 
in the central nervous system and brain. This allows for the sensory and motor systems to 
interact, facilitating complex behaviors and integrating across the different sensory 
modalities. For example, to be able to reach for an object such as a teacup, your brain 
needs to link together your ability to sense the presence and location of the cup with your 
ability to control the muscles in your arm to grasp the cup. Interneurons perform this 
function.
Finally, before starting your journey in learning about neuroscience, pause to contemplate 
some of the big questions and insights as they pertain to the Western science of the mind. 
As you go through this textbook and learn new concepts, it will be useful to think about 
them within the context of these big questions. For example, what is sentience? Is a brain 
required for sentience? The jellyfish we mentioned earlier can have basic sensations and 
react to the environment without a brain, but it cannot think or have memory. What are 
the necessary conditions to be sentient? What is the relationship between the mind and 
body? As a method of inquiry, can science directly investigate subjective experience? Or 
must we use alternative, and perhaps complementary methods of inquiry to achieve that? 
Do we perceive the physical world directly, or are our perceptions constructed? If the 
latter, how does that happen?
2) WHAT IS NEUROSCIENCE AND WHAT ARE ITS BRANCH SCIENCES?
In the case of humans, it is the branch of science that studies the brain, the spinal cord, 
the nerves extending from them, and the rest of the nervous systems including the 
synapses, etc. Recall that neurons, or nerve cells, are the biological cells that make up the 
nervous system, and the nervous system is the complex network of connections between 
those cells. In this connection, it may involve itself with the cellular and molecular bases
of the nervous system as well as the systems responsible for sensory and motor activities 
of the body. It also deals with the physical bases of mental processes of all levels, 
including emotions and cognitive elements. Thus, it concerns itself with issues such as 
thoughts, mental activities, behaviors, the brain and the spinal cord, functions of nerves, 
neural disorders, etc. It wrestles with questions such as What is consciousness?, How and 
why do beings have mental activities?, What are the physical bases for the variety of 
neural and mental illnesses, etc.
In identifying the sub-branches within neuroscience, there are quite a few ways of doing 
so. However, here we will follow the lead of the Society for Neuroscience which 
identifies the following five branches: Neuro-anatomy, Developmental Neuroscience, 
Cognitive Neuroscience, Behavioral Neuroscience, and Neurology. Of these, 
Page 8 of 35
neuroanatomy concerns itself mainly with the issue of structures and parts of the nervous 
system. In this discipline, the scientists employ special dyeing techniques in identifying 
neurotransmitters and in understanding the specific functions of the nerves and nerve 
centers. Neurotransmitters are chemicals released between neurons for transmission of 
signals. When a neuron communicates with its neighboring cells, it releases 
neurotransmitters and its neighbors receive them. In developmental neuroscience, the 
scientists look into the phases and processes of development of nervous system, the 
changes they undergo after they have matured, and their eventual degeneration. In this 
regard, the scientists also investigate the ways neurons go about seeking connection with 
other neurons, how they establish the connection, and how they maintain the connection 
and what chemical changes and processes they have to undergo for these activities. 
Neurons make connections to form networks, and the different patterns of connectivity 
support different functions. Patterns of connectivity can change over different time 
scales, such as developmental changes over a lifetime from infancy to old age, but also in 
the short term such as learning a new concept. Neuroplasticity is the term that describes 
the capacity of the brain to change in response to stimulation or even damage: it is not a 
static organ, but is highly adaptable. In cognitive neuroscience, they study the functions 
of behaviors, perceptions, and memories, etc. By making use of non-invasive methods 
such as the PTE and MRI technologies that allow us to take detailed pictures of the brain 
without opening the skull, they look into the neural pathways activated during 
engagement in language, solutions, and other activities. Cognitive neuroscience studies 
the mind-body relationship by discovering the neural correlates to mental and behavioral 
phenomena. Behavioral neuroscience looks into the underpinning processes of human 
and animal behaviors. Using electrodes, they measure the neural electrical activities 
occurring alongside our actions such as visual perception, language use, and generating 
memories. Through fMRI scan techniques, another technology that allows us to take 
detailed motion pictures of brain activity over time without opening the skull, they strive 
to arrive at closer understanding of the brain parts in real time. Finally, neurology makes 
use of the fundamental research findings of the other disciplines in understanding the 
neural and neuronal disorders and strives to explore new innovative ways of detecting, 
preventing, and treating these disorders. 
3) THE SUBJECT MATTER OF NEUROSCIENCE: THE MAIN SYSTEMS AND THEIR 
PARTS
The field of neuroscience is the nervous system of animals in general and of humans in
particular. In the case of humans, its nervous system has two main components: the 
central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) (Figure 7). The 
CNS comprises of the brain and the spinal cord. Their functions involve processing and 
interpreting the information received the senses, skin, muscles, etc. and giving responses 
Page 9 of 35
that direct and dictate specific actions such as particular movements by different parts of 
the body.
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) includes all the rest of the nervous system aside 
from the central nervous system. This means that it comprises the 12 pairs of cranial 
nerves that originate directly from the brain and spread to different parts of the body 
bypassing the spinal cord, and the 31 pairs of spinal nerves that pass through the spinal 
cord and spread to different parts of the body. Thus, the PNS is mainly constituted of 
nerve. PNS is sometimes further classified into voluntary nervous system and the 
autonomic nervous system. This is based on the fact that the nerves in the former system 
are involved in making conscious movements, whereas those in the latter system make 
movements over which the person does not have control. Obviously, the former category 
of nerves includes those associated with the muscles of touch, smell, vision, and skeleton. 
The latter includes nerves spread over muscles attached with heart beats, blood pressure, 
glands, and smooth muscles.
4) AN EXCLUSIVE LOOK AT ‘NEURONS’, A FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF THE 
BRAIN AND THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
Neurons
Neurons are the cellular units of the brain and nervous system, and are otherwise called 
nerve cells (Figure 8). Estimates of the number of brain neurons range from 50 billion to 
500 billion, and they are not even the most numerous cells in the brain. Like hepatocyte 
cells in the liver, osteocytes in bone, or erythrocytes in blood, each neuron is a selfcontained functioning unit. Its internal components, the organelles, include a nucleus 
harboring the genetic material (DNA), energy-providing mitochondria, and proteinmaking ribosomes. As in most other types of cells, the organelles are concentrated in the 
main cell body. In addition, characteristic features of neurons are neurites—long, thin, 
finger-like or threadlike extensions from the cell body (soma). The two main types are 
dendrites and axons. Usually, dendrites receive nerve signals, while axons send them 
onward. The cell body of a neuron is about 10-100 micrometers across, that is 1/100th to 
1/10th of one millimeter. Also, the axon is 0.2-20 micrometers in diameter, dendrites are 
usually slimmer. In terms of length, dendrites are typically 10-50 micrometers long, 
while axons can be up a few centimeters (inches). This is mostly the case in the central 
nervous system (Figure 9).
Classification of neurons
Page 10 of 35
There are numerous ways of classifying neurons among themselves. One of them is by 
the direction that they send information. On this basis, we can classify all neurons into 
the three: sensory neurons, motor neurons, and interneurons. The sensory neurons are 
those that send information received from sensory receptors toward the central nervous 
system, whereas the motor neurons send information away from the central nervous 
system to muscles or glands. The interneurons are those neurons that send information 
between sensory neurons and motor neurons. Here, the sensory neurons receive 
information from sensory receptors (e.g., in skin, eyes, nose, tongue, ears) and send them 
toward the central nervous system. Because of this, these neurons are also called afferent 
neurons as they bring informational input towards the central nervous system. Likewise, 
the motor neurons bring motor information away from the central nervous system to 
muscles or glands, and are thus called efferent neurons as they bring the output from the 
central nervous system to the muscles or glands. Since the interneurons send information 
between sensory neurons and motor neurons, thus serving as connecting links between 
them, they are sometimes called internuncial neurons. This third type of neurons is 
mostly found in the central nervous system.
Another way of classifying the neurons is by the number of extensions that extend from 
the neuron’s cell body (soma) (Figure 10). In accordance with this system, we have 
unipolar, bipolar, and multipolar neurons. This classification takes into account the 
number of extensions extending initially from the cell body of the neuron, not the overall 
number of extensions. This is because there can be unipolar neurons which have more 
than one extensions in total. However, what the difference here is from the other two 
types of neurons is that these unipolar neurons shall have only one initial extension from 
the cell body. Most of the neurons are multipolar in nature. 
Synapses
Synapses are communication sites where neurons pass nerve impulses among themselves. 
The cells are not usually in actual physical contact, but are separated by an incredibly thin 
gap, called the synaptic cleft. Microanatomically, synapses are divided into types 
according to the sites where the neurons almost touch. These sites include the soma, the 
dendrites, the axons, and tiny narrow projections called dendritic spines found on certain 
kinds of dendrites. Axospinodendrittic synapses form more than 50 percent of all 
synapses in the brain; axodendritic synapses constitute about 30 percent (Figure 11). 
How signals are passed among neurons
Page 11 of 35
Neurons send signals to each other across the synapses. Initially, signals enter into the 
cell body of a neuron through their dendrites, and they pass down the axon until their 
arrival at the axon terminals. From there, the signal is sent across to the next neuron. 
Starting from the time the signal passes along the dendrites and axon, eventually reaching 
the axon terminal, it consists of moving electrically charges ions, but at a synapse while 
making that transition, it relies more on the structural shape of the chemical 
neurotransmitters. 
Every two neurons are separated by a gap, called synaptic cleft, at their synaptic site. The 
neuron preceding the synapse is known as pre-synaptic neuron and the one following the 
synapse is known as post-synaptic neuron. When the action potential of the pre-synaptic 
neuron is passed along its axon and reaches the other end of it, it causes synaptic vesicles 
to fuse or merge with the membrane. This releases the neurotransmitter molecules to pass 
or diffuse across the synaptic cleft to the post-synaptic membrane and slot into receptor 
sites (Figure 12).
Neurotransmitter molecules slot into the same-shaped receptor sites in the postsynaptic 
membrane. A particular neurotransmitter can either excite a receiving nerve cell and 
continue a nerve impulse, or inhibit it. Which of these occurs depends on the type of 
membrane channel on the receiving cell.
The interaction among neurons or between a neuron and another type of body cell, all 
occur due to the transfer of neurotransmitters. Thus, our body movements, mental 
thought processes, as well as feelings, etc. are all dependent on the transfer of 
neurotransmitters. 
In particular, let’s take a look into how the muscle movements happen due to the transfer 
of neurotransmitter. The axons of motor neurons extend from the spinal cord to the 
muscle fibers. For intending to perform any action, either of the speech or body, the 
command has to originate from the brain to the spinal cord. From the spinal cord, the 
command has to pass through motor neurons to the specific body parts, upon which the 
respective actions will be performed. The electrical impulse released along the axon of 
the motor neuron arrives at the axon terminal. Once they are there, then the 
neurotransmitters are secreted to carry the signals across the synapse. The receptors in the 
membrane of the muscles cells attach to the neurotransmitters and stimulate the 
electrically charged ions within the muscle cells. This leads to the contraction or 
extension of the respective muscles. 
Page 12 of 35
5) FACTS ABOUT HUMAN BRAIN
Brain is a complex organ generally found in vertebrates. Of all the brains, human brain is 
even more complex. On average, a human brain weighs about one and a half kilogram, 
and has over 100 billion neurons. Each of these neurons is connected with several other 
neurons and thus, just the number of synapses (nerve cell connections) exceeds 100 
trillion. The sustenance required to keep these neurons alive is supplied by different parts 
of the body. For example, 25 percent of the body total oxygen consumption is used up by 
the brain. Likewise, 25 percent of the glucose produced by our food is used up by it. Of 
the total amount of blood pumped out by our heart, 15 percent goes to the brain. Thus, 
from among the different parts of the body, the brain is the single part that uses the most 
amount of energy. The reason for this is because the brain engages itself in unceasing 
activity, day and night, of interpreting data form the internal and external environment, 
and respond to them. To protect this important organ from harm, it is naturally enclosed 
in three layers of protection, with an additional cushioning fluid in between. These layers 
are, in turn, protected with the hard covering, the skull, which is once again wound 
around by the skin of the scalp (Figure 13).
The main function of the brain is to enhance the chance of survival of the person by 
proper regulation of the body conditions based on the brain’s reading of the internal and 
external environment. The way it carries out this function is by first registering the 
information received and responding to them by undertaking several activities. The brain 
also gives rise to inner conscious awareness alongside performing those processes. When 
the data, released by the different body senses, in the form of electrical impulses 
uninterruptedly arrive at the brain, the brain first of all checks their importance. When it 
finds them to be either irrelevant or commonplace, then it makes them dissolve by 
themselves and the concerned person doesn’t even generate an awareness of them. This is 
how only around 5 percent of the overall information received by the brain ever reaches 
our consciousness. For the rest of the information, the brain may process them, but they 
never become the subject of our consciousness. If, on the other hand, the information at 
hand is important or novel, the brain increases it impulses and allows it to active all over 
its parts. Remaining active for over a period of time, a conscious awareness unto this 
impulse is generated. Sometimes, in the wake of generating a conscious awareness, the 
brain sends commands to relevant muscles for either contraction or extension, thus 
making the body parts in question to engage in certain actions.
Page 13 of 35
6) MAJOR PARTS OF HUMAN BRAIN
Human brain is enclosed within its natural enclosures. In its normal form, it is found to be 
composed of three major parts (Figure 14).
Cerebrum
Of the three parts mentioned above, cerebrum is located in the uppermost position and is 
also the largest in size. It takes up ¾ of the entire brain size. It is itself composed of two 
brain hemispheres—the right and the left hemispheres. The two hemispheres are held 
together by a bridge like part called corpus callosum, a large bundle of neurons. The 
covering layer of the hemispheres is constituted of the cortex of which the average 
thickness is between 2 to 4 millimeters. The higher centers of coordinating and regulating 
human physical activities are located in the cortex areas, such as the motor center, 
proprioception center (proprioception is the sense of the relative position of the body in 
space, for example being aware that your arm is extended when reaching for the 
doorknob), language center, visual center, and auditory center. The outer surface of the 
cortex is formed of grooves and bulges because of which, despite being quite expansive, 
the cortex is able to be contained in the relatively small area. In terms of its basic 
composition, the outer layer of cortex is mostly made of gray matter, which is mainly 
comprised of cell bodies and nerve tissues formed out of nerve fibers. This matter is gray 
with a slight reddish shade in color. In the layer below, the cortex is formed of the white 
matter, which is, as the name suggests, white in color and mainly comprised of nerve 
tissues formed out of nerve fibers wrapped around with myelin sheath. Some nerve fibers 
wrapped in myelin sheath bind together the right and left hemispheres of the cerebrum, 
while others connect it with cerebellum, brainstem, and the spinal cord. Most of the brain 
parts belong to cerebrum, such as amygdala and hippocampus, as well as thalamus, 
hypothalamus, and other associated regions. In short, of the division into forebrain, 
midbrain, and hindbrain—in which the entirety of brain is accounted for, the cerebrum 
contains the whole of forebrain (Figure 15).
The surface area of the cerebral cortex is actually quite large, and described above, it 
becomes folded to fit inside the skull. Humans are highly intelligent and creative animals 
not just because of the size of our brains, but also because of the complexity of the 
connections among our neurons. The folded nature of the human cortex promotes more 
complex connections between areas. For example, take a piece of blank paper, and draw 
five dots, one on each corner and one in the middle. Now draw lines from each dot to the 
other four dots. Imagine if these five dots were buildings, and the lines you drew were 
roads, then it would require more time to traverse from one corner to another corner than 
from one corner to the center. But what if you fold the four corners of the paper on top of 
Page 14 of 35
the center of the page? Suddenly all five of those dots become immediate neighbors, and 
it becomes very easy to walk from one “building” to another. The folding of the cortex 
has a similar effect. Neurons make connections with their neighbors, and if folding the 
cortex increases the number of neighbors each neuron has, then it also increases the 
complexity of the networks that can be formed among those neurons.
Cerebellum
Cerebellum is located below the cerebrum and at the upper back of the brainstem. Its 
name connotes its small size. Its mass is 1/10 of the whole brain. However, in terms of 
the number of neurons it contains, it exceeds that of the remaining parts of the central 
nervous system combined. This lump of nerve tissues, bearing the look of something cut 
in half, covers most of the back of brainstem. With the help of three pairs of fibers,
collectively called cerebral peduncles, the brainstem is bound to the cerebellum. Like the 
cerebrum, it also has a wrinkled surface, but its grooves and bulges are finer and 
organized into more regular patterns. In terms of its physical structure, this too has a long 
groove in the center, with two large lateral lobes, one on each side. These lobes are 
reminiscent of the two hemispheres of the cerebrum and are sometimes termed cerebellar 
hemispheres. The cerebellum has a similar layered microstructure to the cerebrum. The 
outer layer, or cerebellar cortex, is gray matter composed of nerve-cell bodies and their 
dendrite projections. Beneath this is a medullary area of white matter consisting largely 
of nerve fibers. As of now, it has been established that cerebellum’s main function is in 
coordinating the body movement. Although, it may not initiate the movements, however 
it helps in the coordination and timely performance of movements, ensuring their 
integrated control. It receives data from spinal cord and other parts of the brain, and these 
data undergo integration and modification, contributing to the balance and smooth 
functioning of the movements, and thus helps in maintaining the equilibrium. Therefore, 
whenever this part of the brain is plagued by a disorder, the person may not lose total 
movement, but their ability of performing measured and steady movements is affected as 
also their ability to learn new movements. Within the division of entire brain into 
forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain—cerebellum forms part of the hindbrain (Figure 16).
Brainstem
Brainstem is located below the cerebrum and in front of cerebellum. Its lower end 
connects with the spinal cord. It is perhaps misnamed. It is not a stem leading to a
separate brain above, but an integral part of the brain itself. Its uppermost region is the 
midbrain comprising an upper “roof” incorporating the superior and inferior colliculi or 
Page 15 of 35
bulges at the rear, and the tegmentum to the front. Below the midbrain is the hindbrain.
At its front is the large bulge of the pons. Behind and below this is the medulla which 
narrows to merge with the uppermost end of the body’s main nerve, the spinal cord. This 
part of the brain in associated with the middle and lower levels of consciousness. The eye 
movement involved in following a moving object in front of the eye is an example. The 
brainstem is highly involved in mid-to low-order mental activities, for example, the 
almost “automatic” scanning movements of the eyes as we watch something pass by. The 
gray and white matter composites of the brainstem are not as well defined as in other 
parts of the brain. The gray matter in this part of the brain possesses some of the crucial 
centers responsible for basic life functions. For example, the medulla houses groups of 
nuclei that are centers for respiratory (breathing), cardiac (heartbeat), and vasomotor 
(blood pressure) monitoring and control, as well as for vomiting, sneezing, swallowing, 
and coughing. When brainstem is damaged, that will immediately trigger danger to life 
by hindering heartbeat and respiratory processes (Figures 17 & 18).
7) WAYS OF ZONING AND SECTIONING THE HUMAN BRAIN FOR STUDY 
PURPOSES
The two hemispheres
Of the obviously so many different ways of zoning the human brain for study purposes, 
we will take up only a few of them as samples. As briefly mentioned before, a fully 
matured brain has three major parts. Of these the largest is the cerebrum. It covers around 
¾ of the brain size. In terms of its outer structure, it is covered with numerous folds, and 
has a color of purple and gray blended. The cerebrum is formed by two cerebral 
hemispheres, accordingly called the right and the left hemisphere, that are separated by a 
groove, the medial longitudinal fissure. Between the two hemispheres, there is a bundle 
of nerve fibers that connects the two sides, almost serving like connecting rope holding 
the two in place. Called corpus callosum, if this were to be cut into two, the two 
hemispheres would virtually become two separate entities. 
Just as there are two hemispheres, that look broadly like mirror images to each other, on 
the two sides, likewise many of the brain parts exist in pairs, one on each side. However, 
due to the technological advances in general, and that of the MRI, in particular, it has 
been shown that, on average, brains are not as symmetrical in their left-right structure as 
was once believed to be , almost like mirror images (Figure 19).
The two apparently symmetrical hemispheres and, within them, their other paired 
structures are also functionally not mirror images to each other. For example, for most 
Page 16 of 35
people, speech and language, and stepwise reasoning and analysis and so on are based 
mainly on the left side. Meanwhile, the right hemisphere is more concerned with sensory 
inputs, auditory and visual awareness, creative abilities and spatial-temporal awareness
(Figure 20).
The four or the six lobes
Cerebrum is covered with bulges and grooves on its surface. Based on these formations, 
the cerebrum is divided into the four lobes, using the anatomical system. The main and 
the deepest groove is the longitudinal fissure that separates the cerebral hemispheres. 
However, the division into the lobes is made overlooking this fissure, and thus each lobe 
is spread on both the hemispheres. Due to this, we often speak of the four pairs of lobes. 
These lobes are frontal lobes, parietal lobes, occipital lobes, and temporal lobes (Figure 
21). The names of the lobes are partly related to the overlying bones of the skull such as 
frontal and occipital bones. In some naming systems, the limbic lobe and the insula, or 
central lobe, are distinguished as separate from other lobes.
Frontal lobes
Frontal lobes are located at the front of the two hemispheres. Of all the lobes, these are 
the biggest in size as well as the last to develop. In relation to the other lobes, this pair of 
lobes is at the front of the parietal lobes, and above the temporal lobes. Between these 
lobes and the parietal lobes lies the central sulcus, and between these lobes and the 
temporal lobes lies the lateral sulcus. Towards the end of these lobes, i. e. the site where 
the pre-central gyrus is located also happens to be the area of the primary motor cortex. 
Thus, this pair of lobes is clearly responsible for regulating the conscious movement of 
certain parts of the body. Besides, it is known that the cortex areas within these lobes 
hold the largest number of neurons that are very sensitive to the dopamine 
neurotransmitters. Granting this, these lobes should also be related with such mental 
activities as intention, short-term memory, attention, and hope. When the frontal lobes are 
damaged, the person lacks in ability to exercise counter measures against lapses and tend 
to engage in untoward behaviors. These days, neurologist can detect these disorders quite 
easily.
Parietal lobes
Parietal lobes are positioned behind (posterior to) the frontal lobes, and above (superior 
to) the occipital lobes. Using the anatomical system, the central sulcus divides the frontal 
and parietal lobes, as mentioned before. Between the parietal and the occipital lobes lies 
Page 17 of 35
the parieto-occipital sulcus, whereas the lateral sulcus marks the dividing line between 
the parietal and temporal lobes. This pair of lobes integrates sensory information from 
different modalities, particularly determining spatial sense and navigation, and thus is
significant for the acts of touching and holding objects. For example, it comprises 
somatosensory cortex, which is the area of the brain that processes the sense of touch, 
and the dorsal stream of the visual system, which supports knowing where objects are in 
space and guiding the body’s actions in space. Several portions of the parietal lobe are 
important in language processing.
Occipital lobes
The two occipital lobes are the smallest of four paired lobes in the human cerebral cortex. 
They are located in the lower, rearmost portion of the skull. Included within the region of 
this pair of lobes are many areas especially associated with vision. Thus, this lobe holds 
special significance for vision. There are many extrastriate regions within this lobe. These 
regions are specialized for different visual tasks, such as visual, spatial processing, color 
discrimination, and motion perception. When this lobe is damaged, the patient may not be 
able to see part of their visual field, or may be subjected to visual illusions, or even go 
partial or full blind. 
Temporal lobes
Temporal lobe is situated below the frontal and parietal lobes. It contains the 
hippocampus and plays a key role in the formation of explicit long-term memory 
modulated by the amygdala. This means that it is involved in attaching emotions to all the 
data received from all senses. Adjacent areas in the superior, posterior, and lateral part of 
the temporal lobes are involved in high-level auditory processing. The temporal lobe is 
involved in primary auditory perception, such as hearing, and holds the primary auditory 
cortex. The primary auditory cortex receives sensory information from the ears and 
secondary areas process the information into meaningful units such as speech and words. 
The ventral part of the temporal cortices appears to be involved in high-level visual 
processing of complex stimuli such as faces and scenes. Anterior parts of this ventral 
stream for visual processing are involved in object perception and recognition.
Limbic System
The structures of the limbic system are surrounded by an area of the cortex referred to as 
the limbic lobe. The lobe forms a collarlike or ringlike shape on the inner surfaces of the 
cerebral hemispheres, both above and below the corpus callosum. As such, the limbic 
lobe comprises the inward-facing parts of other cortical lobes, including the temporal, 
parietal, and frontal, where the left and right lobes curve around to face each other. 
Page 18 of 35
Important anatomical parts of this lobe are hippocampus and amygdala, associated with 
memory and emotions respectively.
Insular cortex (or insula)
Insular lobe is located between the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes. As suggested by 
its name, it is almost hidden within the lateral sulcus, deep inside the core of the brain. It 
is believed to be associated with consciousness. Since data indicative of the inner status 
of the body, such as the heartbeat, body temperature, and pain assemble here, it is 
believed to impact the equilibrium of the body. Besides, it is also believed to be related 
with several aspects of the mind, such as the emotions. Among these are perception, 
motor regulation, self-awareness, cognition, and inter-personal emotions. Thus, insular 
lobe is considered to be highly related with mental instability.
The forebrain, the midbrain, and the hindbrain
The divisions of the brain so far, either into the two hemispheres or the four or six lobes 
are solely based on the cerebrum alone. None of the above divisions included any portion 
either of the cerebellum or the brainstem. Yet another way of dividing the portions of the 
brain is into the forebrain, the midbrain, and the hindbrain (Figure 22. This is the most 
comprehensive division of the brain, leaving no parts of it outside. There are two systems 
of presenting this division: one, on the basis of the portions of the brain during early 
development of the central nervous system, and the other, based on the full maturation of 
those early parts into their respective regions of an adult brain. Here, we follow the latter 
system.
The forebrain
The forebrain is so called because of its extension to the forefront of the brain. It is the 
largest among the three divisions. It even spreads to the top and back part of the brain. It 
houses both the hemispheres, as well as the entire portion of the part known as the 
diencephalon. Diencephalon comprises of the hippocampus, which is associated with 
memory, and the amygdala, which is associated with emotions. Besides them, the 
forebrain also includes both the thalamus and the hypothalamus, of which the former is 
the part of the brain that processes information received from other parts of the central 
nervous system and the peripheral nervous system into the brain, and the latter which is 
involved is several activities such as appetite, sexuality, body temperature, and hormones. 
Page 19 of 35
The midbrain
The midbrain is located below the forebrain and above the hindbrain. It resides in the 
core of the brain, almost like a link between the forebrain and the midbrain. It regulates 
several sensory processes such as that of the visual and auditory ones, as well as motor 
processes. This is also the region where several visual and auditory reflexive responses 
take place. These are involuntary reflexes in response to the external stimuli. Several of 
the masses of gray matter, composed mainly of the cell bodies, such as the basal ganglia 
linked with movement are also present in the midbrain. Of the above three major 
divisions of the brain, the midbrain belongs to the brainstem, and of the two main 
systems within the nervous system, it belongs to the central nervous system.
The hindbrain 
The hindbrain is located below the end-tip of the forebrain, and at the exact back of the 
midbrain. It includes cerebellum, the pons, and the medulla, among others. Of these, the 
cerebellum has influence over body movement, equilibrium, and balance. The pons not 
only brings the motor information to the cerebellum, but is also related with the control 
over sleep and wakeful states. Finally, the medulla is responsible for involuntary 
processes of the nervous system associated with such activities as respiration and 
digestion. In terms of anatomy, pons is uppermost part, and beneath it the cerebellum and 
the medullae, which tapers to merge with the spinal cord.
Vertical organization of the brain
The organization of the brain layers can be said to represent a certain gradation of mental 
processes (Figure 23). The uppermost brain region, the cerebral cortex, is mostly 
involved in conscious sensations, abstract thought processes, reasoning, planning, 
working memory, and similar higher mental processes. The limbic areas on the brain’s 
innermost sides, around the brainstem, deal largely with more emotional and instinctive 
behaviors and reactions, as well as long-term memory. The thalamus is a preprocessing 
and relay center, primarily for sensory information coming from lower in the brainstem, 
bound for the cerebral hemispheres above. Moving down the brainstem into the medulla 
are the so-called ‘vegetative’ centers of the brain, which sustain life even if the person 
has lost consciousness.
Anatomical directions and reference planes of the brain
To enable us to identify the precise location in the brain, both vertically and horizontally, 
it is important to be familiar with certain technical terms used by the neuroscientists. In 
Page 20 of 35
terms of anatomy, the front of the brain, nearest the face, is referred to as the anterior end, 
and polar opposite to the anterior end is the posterior end, referring to the back of the 
head. Superior (sometimes called dorsal) refers to the direction toward the top of the 
head, and inferior (sometimes called ventral) refers to the direction toward the neck/body. 
In terms of reference planes, the sagittal plane divides the brain into left and right 
portions, the coronal plane divides the brain into anterior and posterior portions, and the 
axial (sometimes called horizontal) plane divides the brain into superior and inferior 
portions (Figure 24).
In both the above contexts, we can further specify the location of a particular portion or 
plane in terms of its position, direction, and depth in relation to the whole brain. 
Likewise, for each of the planes themselves, we can further speak in terms of position, 
direction, and depth in relation to the whole brain as well as in relation to the individual 
planes.
Also, when representing brain parts and structures, a lateral view illustrates the section or 
lobes, etc. from the perspective of a whole brain, whereas a medial view illustrates the 
section in the dissected manner.
8) DIFFERENT TYPES OF BRAINS
In general, the number of living beings who possess brain is numerous. Their brains vary 
both in size and function. However, if you ask whether all brains completely differ from 
each other. Definitely not. There are features that are common to almost all brains, such 
as that all brains are composed mainly of neurons, and that they all have the function of 
protecting the individual being from internal and external dangers. So, although there are 
various types of brains, here we shall focus mainly on the differences in brain types 
between vertebrates and invertebrates in general, and the differences within the 
vertebrates in particular. 
As you know, vertebrates are those animals who have backbone, and invertebrates do not 
have backbone. Most of the invertebrates do not have brain. However, those, among 
them, who do possess brain, theirs is usually a simple brain, composed of very few 
neurons. Note that majority of the animals on this earth are invertebrates. The vertebrates 
make up only two percent of the entire animal population. The unicellular organisms, 
because of practical existential reason, usually tend to be very sensitive to light. 
Organisms such as sea-urchins are slightly more complex and are multi-cellular. They 
have a few nerve cells that regulate the function of looking for sustenance and providing 
protection from possible dangers. Slightly more complex than the types of sea-urchins are 
earthworm and jellyfish, which have neurons that assist them in fighting hostile external 
Page 21 of 35
environment (Figure 25). It is interesting to know that the neurons these simple 
organisms have are similar to the human neurons in terms of structure, function, as well 
as their neurotransmitters. If you ask, what is the difference then? There hardly is any 
connection between the nerves in the invertebrates. Besides that, the nerves almost cover 
their entire bodies. For example, among the invertebrates, earthworms (Figure 26) have 
one of the simplest types of brains, possessing only a few neurons. Their brains regulate 
only a few simple tasks such as eating food and doing a few simple body movements, not 
any higher actions. The network of neurons that process and interpret the information 
received from the earthworm’s body parts is present in the earthworm’s head. However, 
even if that network were to be removed from its body, no noticeable changes would be 
observe in its behavior.
Still, among the invertebrates, grasshoppers and bees have slightly more complex brains. 
Scientists have begun to understand the relation between their brains and the 
corresponding behaviors (Figure 27). The ants, also an invertebrate, have more complex 
behavior, but have a very tiny brain. Likewise, the mosquitoes perform the function of 
flying in the space, suck blood from others, etc. However, their brain size is still no more 
than a small dot.
Among the vertebrates, the mice are generally quite smart, yet have brains weighing no 
more than 2 grams. Their entire brain size is equivalent to that of the human 
hypothalamus. Though generally it is said the bigger the brain, the greater the intellect. 
However, in actuality it is the overall area of cortices, not just the overall bulk that
determines the level of intellect. 
Among the vertebrates, there are mammals and non-mammals. Birds and fish are 
examples of non-mammals. It is known that the brains of mammals and non-mammals 
differ greatly in terms of complexity in the areas of composition, neurons, synapses, etc. 
Though they still have the same basic parts and structures, they differ in the overall brain 
size in relation to their bodies. Besides that, depending on which parts play out more in 
their life, they differ in the relative size of specific parts of the brain and body. For 
example, birds and fish have relatively very small olfactory bulb. Also, these nonmammalian animals lack brain cortex. Cerebral cortex is a special brain part, quite 
prominent in primates including the humans. Not only this, human beings are known to 
have a disproportionately large cortex (Figures 28 & 29).
The average weight of human brain amounts to only one and a half percent of their body 
weight. However, it consumes 20 percent of the food required by the whole body. So, the 
larger the brain is the greater the amount of energy consumption. Therefore, bigger brain 
Page 22 of 35
is not always a sign of boon to the individual species. This may be the reason why there 
are no many species with larger brains in the history of evolution.
Social animals that depend on their social community for survival are said to have larger 
brains. For example, dolphins, who hunt in groups, have fairly large brain. Although, the 
brains of elephants and whales are much bigger in size than that of the humans, but 
humans have the largest brains in proportionate to their body sizes. 
9) FACTS ABOUT HUMAN SPINAL CORD
Spinal cord is located within the vertebrae of the backbone. It extends from brainstem 
down to the first lumbar vertebra. It is roughly the width of a conventional pencil, 
tapering at it base even thinner. It is comprised of a bundle of fibers, and the fibers are 
long projections of nerve cells, extending from the base of the brain to the lower region 
of the spine. The spinal cord carries information to and from the brain and all parts of the 
body except the head, which is served by the cranial nerves. The signals that travel along 
the spinal cord are known as nerve impulses. Data from the sensory organs in different 
parts of the body is collected via the spinal nerves and transmitted along the spinal cord 
to the brain. The spinal cord also sends motor information, such as movement commands, 
from the brain out to the body, again transmitted via the spinal nerve network.
In terms of its anatomy, the spinal cord (Figure 30) is constituted of what is known as 
white matter and gray matter. The gray matter, which forms the core of the spinal cord, is 
composed mainly of nerve cell bodies and forms an external look of a butterfly. The 
white matter surrounds the gray matter and its nerve fibers play a significant role of 
establishing connection between different parts of the spinal cord as well as between the 
brain and the spinal cord. The outer regions of white matter insulate the long projecting 
nerve fibers (axons) coming out from the neurons.
In the gray matter of the spinal cord, there are numerous low-key nerve centers that can 
perform certain fundamental movement responses. However, the nerve centers within the 
spinal cord are regulated by the brain. The ability of the humans in consciously 
controlling the bowl movement is an example in this regard. The fact that infants frequent 
to toilets more often than the adults and that many have bedwetting problem is due to the 
brain being not fully developed as well as lacking in control over urine. Thus, the spinal 
cord serves as a pathway of connection between the brain, the rest of the body, and 
internal organs. The spinal cord stays in contact with the majority of body organs through 
the medium of nerves.
Page 23 of 35
10) PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
As discussed above, the whole of nervous system is divided into the central nervous 
system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Of these two, we have already 
discussed the central nervous system constituted by the brain and the spinal cord. So here, 
we will take up the remaining part, i.e. the peripheral nervous system. The peripheral 
nervous system is a complex network of nerves extending across the body, branching out 
from 12 pairs of cranial nerves originating in the brain and 31 pairs of spinal nerves 
emanating from the spinal cord. It relays information between the body and the brain in 
the form of nerve impulses. It has an afferent division (through which messages are sent 
to the brain) and an efferent division (which carries messages from the brain to the body). 
Finally, there is the autonomic nervous system, which shares some nerve structures with 
both the CNS and PNS. It functions ‘automatically’ without conscious awareness, 
controlling basic functions, such as body temperature, blood pressure, and heart rate.
Sensory input travels quickly from receptor points throughout the body via the afferent 
networks of the PNS to the brain, which processes, coordinates, and interprets the data in 
just fractions of a second. The brain makes an executive decision that is conveyed via the 
efferent division of the PNS to muscles, which take the needed action.
The twelve pairs of cranial nerves
There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves (Figure 31). They are all linked directly to the brain 
and do not enter the spinal cord. They allow sensory information to pass from the organs 
of the head, such as the eyes and ears, to the brain and also convey motor information 
from the brain to these organs—for example, directions for moving the mouth and lips in 
speech. The cranial nerves are named for the body part they serve, such as the optic nerve 
for the eyes, and are also assigned Roman numerical, following anatomical convention.
Of these, some are associated with sensory information and others with motor 
information, while some are associated with both the kinds of information.
How cranial nerves attach
The cranial nerves I and II connect to the cerebrum, while cranial nerves III to XII 
connect to the brainstem. The fibers of sensory cranial nerves each project from a cell 
body that is located outside the brain itself, in sensory ganglia or elsewhere along the 
trunks of sensory nerves. 
The thirty-one pairs of spinal nerves
Page 24 of 35
There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves (Figure 32). These branch out from the spinal cord, 
dividing and subdividing to form a network connecting the spinal cord to every part of 
the body. The spinal nerves carry information from receptors around the body to the 
spinal cord. From here the information passes to the brain for processing. Spinal nerves 
also transmit motor information from the brain to the body’s muscles and glands so that 
the brain’s instructions can be carried out swiftly. Each of the 31 pairs of spinal nerves 
belongs to one of the four spinal regions--- cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral. Of 
them, the cervical region has eight pairs, the thoracic has twelve pairs, the lumbar has 
five, and finally, the sacral has six pairs.
How spinal nerves attach
As mentioned above, human spinal cord is located within the vertebrae of the backbone. 
So, one may wonder how the spinal nerves attach to the spinal cord. There are gaps in the 
vertebrae of the backbone through which spinal nerves enter the spinal cord (Figure 33). 
The nerves divide into spinal nerve roots, each made up of tiny rootlets that enter the 
back and front parts of the cord.
11) A SLIGHTLY DETAILED LOOK AT THE SENSES
How do our brain and the environment interact? Here is how. First the senses come in 
contact with the external stimuli such as light, sound wave, pressure, etc. to which the 
corresponding senses respond. Then those sense data are sent along the respective 
sensory nerves in the form of electrical signals which eventually reach their respective 
sites on the brain cortices. That is when we shall have the perception of the respective 
objects.
SEEING
Let’s now take up each of the senses, one by one. First, we discuss the sense of vision. 
We shall look into the following topics surrounding the sense of vision: the structure of 
eye, its receptor cells, the visual pathway, and the range of light frequency different 
animals, including humans, have access to.
Page 25 of 35
STRUCTURE OF EYE
The eyeball is a fluid-filled orb. It has a hole in the front called pupil. At the back of the 
eyeball, there is retina which is a sheet of nerve cells. Some of the retinal cells are lightsensitive (photoreceptive). In the center of the retina, there is a tiny pitted area called 
fovea, densely packed with cones which are color-picking, light-sensitive cells and are 
significant in detecting detailed, sensitive image of the object. Between the pupil and the 
retina is a lens that adjusts to help the light passing through pupil to focus on the surface 
of the retina. The pupil is surrounded by a muscular ring of pigmented fibers called iris. 
The iris is responsible for people having different eye colors, and it also controls the 
amount of light entering into the eye. The pupil is covered by a transparent layer of clear 
tissue called cornea which merges with the tough outer surface or the ‘white’ of the eye 
called sclera. In the back of the eye, there is a hole (optic disk) through which the optic 
nerves pass through to enter the brain (Figure 34).
LIGHT-RECEPTIVE CELLS
As mentioned before, retina is located at the back of the eye, and is composed of lightreceptive cells (photoreceptors). There are, in the main, two types of photoreceptors in 
the retina: cone cells and rod cells. The cone cells detect the color components from 
amongst the visible light spectrum, and are also responsible for detecting fine detail.
However, cone photoreceptors require a huge amount of light to perform its function 
well. Cone cells in the humans are of three types: red-, blue-, and green-sensing cones, 
each detecting the respective colors. They are all formed on the surface and around the 
fovea. On the other hand, the rod cells are formed on the periphery of retina. These cells 
can detect images even in dim light. However, these cells mainly detect shape and 
motion, not so much the color. Of these two types of photoreceptors, the rods are much 
more sensitive to light, so much so that even with just a few light particles, they can at 
least generate a faint image. Besides, the manner of concentration of these cells in and 
around fovea impacts greatly the sensitivity of the sensation of the object. The majority 
of the 6 million cone cells are concentrated in the fovea, whereas all of the more than 120 
million rod cells are spread around the fovea. Since the rods are spread over a larger area 
of the retina, they are relatively less concentrated, and thus, when one sees objects, they 
are not seen that clearly and detailed.
Page 26 of 35
VISUAL PATHWAYS
The light reflected from the visual objects first enters the pupil through cornea, and 
through pupil it enters deeper into the eyes. The iris that surrounds the pupil controls the 
amount of light entering the eyes by changing its shapes, due to which the pupil appears 
to contract when the light is bright and sharp, and expands when it is less bright. 
Afterwards, the light passes through the lens which bends (refracts) the light, making the 
light to converge on the retina. If focusing on a near object, the lens thickens to increase 
refraction, but if the object is distant, the lens needs to flatten. The light then hits the 
photoreceptors in the retina, some of which fire, sending electrical signals to the brain via 
the optic nerve.
Information received from the outer environment upon coming in contact with eyes has 
to travel right to the back of the brain where the relevant cortex (visual cortex) is, and 
only there it is turned into a conscious vision. Here is the pathway through which the 
information passes from the eyes to the optic nerves to the visual cortex: the signals from 
the eyes passes through the two optic nerves and converge at a crossover junction called 
the optic chiasm. The fibers carrying the signals continue on to form the optic tracts, one 
on each side, which end at the lateral geniculate nucleus, part of the thalamus. However, 
the signals continue to the visual cortex via bands of nerve fibers, called the optic 
radiation (Figure 35).
RANGE OF LIGHT WAVELENGTH THAT DIFFERENT ANIMALS, INCLUDING 
HUMANS, HAVE ACCESS TO
In the course of evolution, by means of natural selection, different species of organisms, 
including the humans, have evolved eyes with varying structures and functions. That 
range of electromagnetic spectrum visible to the human eyes is called the visible light, 
which range from 400 to 700 nanometers on the wavelength. That is, from the violet, 
with the shorter wavelengths, to red, with longer wavelengths. Lights with wavelengths 
outside of the above range are normally not visible to humans. This illustrates the 
difference in the structure of eyes among different species of organisms. For example, the 
vultures and rabbits have different eye from each other. Due to that, vultures can see 
much farther than the rabbits do, yet cannot see as widely as the rabbits do. Likewise, the 
infrared light that the humans cannot see is visible to some types of fish and birds. Some 
birds can tell a male bird from a female bird just by looking at the infrared light reflected 
from their wings.
Likewise, there are two main features distinct in the eyes of the bees that the humans do 
not have. First, their eyes can detect infrared light that the humans cannot. Second, their 
Page 27 of 35
visual processing is five-fold speedier than that of the humans. For example, when the 
bees observe a normal moving object, they do not see that as moving. Rather, they are 
said to see that in the form of a series of distinct temporal instances.
What accounts for such a unique feature of the bees’ eyes? Their eyes are composed of 
six-sided lens, covered with about 4500 circular discs. These lens let in just the lights 
reflected from the object they focus on and not from around it. Besides that, unlike 
human eyes, the eyes of the bees are said to have nine types of light receptors. Because of 
the speed of the visual processing that the bees possess, they have a advantage of being 
able to negotiate their movement so well even while moving with so much speed with the 
least incidents of ever bumping against objects, etc.
Also, often we wonder about the sharp lights reflected back from the eyes of cats and 
other animals of that family. That is now understood to be due to the fact that all the 
lights entering their eyes fail to be absorbed in the retina, and are thus reflected back by 
the membrane called the reflective white.
HEARING
The ear is divided into three sections: the outer ear, the middle ear, and the inner ear. The 
outer ear has three further sections: the visible part of the ear called the pinna, the 
auditory canal, and the eardrum. The middle ear has three tiny bone structures that help in 
our hearing process: malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and stapes (stirrup). The inner ear 
has several parts, of which the important ones are oval window, cochlea, and auditory 
nerve. The outer ear funnels sound waves along the auditory canal to the eardrum which 
is situated towards the inner end of the air canal. Immediate after the eardrum, the three 
tiny bones of the middle ear are attached one after the other. The sound waves cause the 
eardrum to vibrate, which in turn causes this chain of bones to vibrate. The vibration 
eventually reaches a membrane known as the oval window, the start of the inner ear. The 
oval window is slightly smaller than the ear drum in diameter. Because of this, when the 
vibration enters from the middle ear into the inner ear, the vibration becomes more 
consolidated. Inner ear is situated deep under the skull. Commensurate with the force of 
sound waves striking the ear drum, the stapes will accordingly cause the oval window to 
vibrate. Due to this, the fluids filling the chambers of cochlea will move, causing basilar 
membrane to vibrate. This stimulates the sensory hair cells on the organ of corti 
transforming the pressure waves into electrical impulses. These impulses pass through 
auditory nerve to the temporal lobe and from there to the auditory cortex (Figure 36).
Page 28 of 35
Because of the way human ear is structured, it has access to a limited range of sound 
frequency. That is between 20 and 20000 Hertz. Sounds beyond that range are not 
audible to the humans. Sounds vary in terms of their pitch, and the receptors 
corresponding to them are found in the various parts of the cochlea. The receptors for low 
pitch sounds are located in the front part of cochlea, whereas receptors for the higher and 
the highest pitch sounds are found in the middle and inner end, respectively, of the 
cochlea.
SMELL
The area within each nasal cavity that contains the olfactory receptor cells is known as 
the olfactory epithelium. A small amount of the air entering the nostrils will pass over the 
epithelium, which is covered in mucus. Smell molecules in the air dissolve in this mucus, 
bringing receptors into direct contact with the smell molecules. Three cell types are 
within the epithelium: in addition to the receptor cells, there are supporting cells which 
produce a constant supply of mucus and, basal cells, which produce new receptor cells 
every few weeks. The larger the epithelium is, the keener the sense of smell. Dogs, for 
example, have a considerably larger olfactory epithelium than humans.
Like the sense of taste, smell is a chemical sense. Specialized receptors in the nasal cavity 
detect incoming molecules, which enter the nose on air currents and bind to receptor 
cells. Sniffing sucks up more odor molecules into the nose, allowing you to ‘sample’ a 
smell. Olfactory receptors located high up in the nasal cavity send electrical impulses to 
the olfactory bulb, in the limbic area of the brain, for processing.
Odors are initially registered by receptor cells in the nasal cavity. These send electrical 
impulses along dedicated pathways to the olfactory bulb (each nostril connects to one 
olfactory bulb). The olfactory bulb is the smell gateway to the brain. It is part of the 
brain’s limbic system, the seat of our emotions, desires, and instincts, which is why smell 
can trigger strong emotional reactions. Once processed by the olfactory bulb, data is then 
sent to various areas of the brain, including the olfactory cortex adjacent to the 
hippocampus. Unlike data gathered by the other sense organs, odors are processed on the 
same side, not opposite, side of the brain as the nostril the sensory data was sent from
(Figure 37).
How do the olfactory receptors detect the different odors? Different smells are produced 
from different molecular structures of smell. Research shows that each receptor has zones 
on it. Therefore, when a specific smell enters the nose, only the receptors forming a 
conforming pattern, not every receptor, is activated. That is how the specific smell is 
Page 29 of 35
detected. So far the scientists have identified eight primary odors: camphorous, fishy, 
malty, minty, musky, spermatic, sweaty, and urinous.
TASTE
Taste and smell are both chemical senses. Therefore, tongue can detect taste only when 
the receptors in it bind to incoming molecules, generating electrical signals that pass
through the related cranial nerves to the specific brain areas. Thus, the pathway of 
gustatory electrical impulses begins with mouth, going to medulla, continues to the 
thalamus, then to primary gustatory areas of the cerebral cortex.
A person can experience the basic five flavors (sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami) by 
merely activating the taste receptors on the tongue. However, the flavors produced from 
the combination of these can be detected by tongue only in interaction with the sense of 
smell. Compared with cold food, we experience the hot food to produce greater taste. 
This is because, during such time, smell particles rising from the hot food bind to and 
excite the smell receptors inside the nose, making us also to sense their smell. Before the 
smell particles and taste particles are detected by the smell receptors and taste receptors 
respectively, these particles have to dissolve in the liquid solvents in the nose and mouth 
respectively. So they are similar on that front. However, what is different between the 
two is that while the taste receptors are not actual neurons, but a special type of cells, the 
smell receptors are actual neurons. Due to this difference, we see a marked difference in 
the degree of sensitivity towards the chemical particles. The smell receptors are 300 
hundred times more sensitive (Figure 38).
The tongue is the main sensory organ for taste detection. It is the body’s most flexible 
muscular organ. It has three interior muscles and three pairs of muscles connecting it to 
the mouth and throat. Its surface is dotted with tiny, pimplelike structures called papillae. 
Papillae are easily visible to naked eyes. Within each papilla are hundreds of taste buds 
and they are distributed across the tongue. Four types of papillae have been 
distinguished---vallate, filiform, foliate, and fungiform. Each type bears a different 
amount of taste buds. A taste bud is composed of a group of about 25 receptor cells 
alongside supporting cells layered together. In general, humans have 5000 to 10,000 taste 
buds, and each bud may carry 25 to 100 taste receptor cells within it. At the tip of each 
cell, there is a hole through which taste chemical particles enter and come in contact with 
the receptor molecules. The tiny hair-like receptors inside these receptor cells can hold 
only particular taste particles. Earlier, scientists believed that different parts of the tongue 
are dedicated to detecting specific tastes. However, according to recent researches, all 
tastes are detected equally across the tongue, and the tongue is well supplied with nerves 
Page 30 of 35
that carry taste-related data to the brain. Other parts of the mouth such as the palate, 
pharynx, and epiglottis can also detect taste stimuli.
TOUCH
There are many kinds of touch sensations. These include light touch, pressure, vibration, 
and temperature as well as pain, and awareness of the body position in space. The skin is 
the body’s main sense organ for touch.
There are around 20 types of touch receptor that respond to various types of stimuli. For 
instance, light touch, a general category that covers sensations ranging from a tap on the 
arm to stroking a cat’s fur, is detected by four different types of receptor cells: free nerve 
endings, found in the epidermis; Merkel’s disks, found in deeper layers of the skin; 
Meissner’s corpuscles, which are common in the palms, soles of the feet, eyelids, 
genitals, and nipples; and, finally, the root hair plexus, which responds when the hair 
moves. Pacinian and Ruffini corpuscles respond to more pressure. The sensation of 
itching is produced by repetitive low-level stimulation of nerve fibers in the skin, while 
feeling ticklish involves more intense stimulation of the same nerve endings when the 
stimulus moves over the skin (Figure 39).
As for the manner in which touch information finally makes its way to the brain, a sense 
receptor, when activated, sends information about touch stimuli as electrical impulses 
along a nerve fiber of the sensory nerve network to the nerve root on the spinal cord. The 
data enters the spinal cord and continues upward to the brain. The processing of sensory 
data is begun by the nuclei in the upper (dorsal) column of the spinal cord. From the 
brainstem, sensory data enters the thalamus, where processing continues. The data then 
travels to the postcentral gyrus of the cerebral cortex, the location of the somatosensory 
cortex. Here, it is finally translated into a touch perception. Somatosensory cerebral 
cortex curls around the brain like a horseshoe. Data from the right side of the body ends 
on the left side of the brain, and vice versa.
THE SIXTH SENSE
Proprioception is sometimes referred to as the sixth sense. It is our sense of how our 
bodies are positioned and moving in space. This ‘awareness’ is produced by part of the 
somatic sensing system, and involves structures called proprioceptors in the muscles, 
tendons, joints, and ligaments that monitor changes in their length, tension, and pressure 
linked to changes in position. Proprioceptors send impulses to the brain. Upon processing 
this information, a decision can be made—to change position or to stop moving. The 
brain then sends signals back to the muscles based on the input from the proprioceptors—
Page 31 of 35
completing the feedback cycle. This information is not always made conscious. For 
example, keeping and adjusting balance is generally an unconscious process.
Conscious proprioception uses the dorsal column-medial lemniscus pathway, which 
passes through the thalamus, and ends in the parietal lobe of the cortex. Unconscious 
proprioception involves spinocerebellar tracts, and ends in the cerebellum. Proprioception 
is impaired when people are under the influence of alcohol or certain drugs. The degree 
of impairment can be tested by field sobriety tests, which have long been used by the 
police in cases of suspected drunk-driving. Typical tests include asking someone to touch 
their index finger to their nose with eyes closed, to stand on one leg for 30 seconds, or to 
walk heel-to-toe in a straight line for nine steps.
MIXED SENSES
Sensory neurons respond to data from specific sense organs. Visual cortical neurons, for 
example, are most sensitive to signals from the eyes. But this specialization is not rigid. 
Visual neurons have been found to respond more strongly to weak light signals if 
accompanied by sound, suggesting that they are activated by data from the ears as well as 
the eyes. Other studies show that in people who are blind or deaf, some neurons that 
would normally process visual or auditory stimuli are “hijacked” by the other senses. 
Hence, blind people hear better and deaf people see better.
SYNESTHESIA
Most people are aware of only a single sensation in response to one type of stimulus. For 
example, sound waves make noise. But some people experience more than one sensation 
in response to a single stimulus. They may “see” sounds as well as hear them, or “taste” 
images. Called synesthesia, this sensory duplication occurs when the neural pathway 
from a sense organ diverges and carries data on one type of stimulus to a part of the brain 
that normally processes another type (Figure 40).
PERCEPTION AS A CONSTRUCT
Do we perceive the external world directly, or do we perceive a constructed reality? 
Neuroscience finds that the latter is a more accurate description. When our sensory 
organs detect something in the environment, they are responding to a physical stimulus. 
For example, the photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye respond to photon particles 
traveling through space. These photons stimulate the receptor neurons, and start a chain 
reaction of neural signals to the primary visual cortex in the brain, where it becomes a 
perception. While the visual perception correlates with the physical stimulus, they are not 
Page 32 of 35
one and the same. It was described earlier that photons have a wavelength, and the 
wavelength can vary among photons. Each numerical difference in the wavelength of a 
photon correlates with a difference in the perception of color. That is, photons with a 
wavelength of around 500 nanometers correlate with perceiving the color blue, while a 
wavelength of around 700 nanometers correlates with perceiving the color red. While the 
physical property of wavelength exists objectively in the world, the perceived color only 
exists subjectively and depends on our ability to detect it. The colors we perceive are not 
physical properties, but rather the psychological correlates of the physical property of 
wavelength of light. Moreover, there are many wavelengths that we cannot detect, so our 
perceptions selectively represent the physical world.
The same principle applies to the other senses. Each sensory modality we have has two 
components: the physical stimulus that is detected by the sensory organ, and the 
psychological perception that results from it. We do not directly perceive the wavelength 
of light, rather we perceive the result of how the photon particles stimulate the visual 
pathway. Therefore, we can say that perception is a construction that is grounded in 
detecting physical phenomena, but we do not directly perceive those phenomena. Nor do 
we perceive all objective phenomena, only those that we are capable of detecting.
If perception is a construction and a limited representation of objective phenomena, why 
did it evolve that way? We need to be able to react to environmental circumstances to 
survive. To find food, to avoid predators, to meet mates, to care for offspring, to engage 
in social behavior, all of these actions require the ability to detect and respond to changes 
in the physical environment. But sensory systems can evolve to be simply good enough 
for survival. It is not necessary to have complete, direct perception to survive. In fact, 
recall the facts we discussed earlier about how the human brain is very demanding for the 
body’s resources. More sophisticated sensory systems require more resources, and if 
those resource requirements are not of great utility to the organism, then evolution likely 
will not favor increasing the level of sophistication. In addition, there is often a trade-off 
between speed and accuracy in neural systems and resulting behaviors. When it comes to 
visual perception, seeing a danger with less accuracy and surviving is more important 
than seeing a danger directly and not surviving!
Page 33 of 35
12)CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE BRAIN
WHAT IS CONSCIOUSNESS? 
Consciousness is important as well as essential. Without it, life would have no meaning. 
However, once we embark on identifying its nature, it is certain to find it to be like 
nothing else. A thought, feeling, or idea seems to be a different kind of thing from the 
physical objects that make up the rest of the universe. The contents of our minds cannot 
be located in space or time. Although to the neuroscientists the contents of our minds 
appear to be produced by particular types of physical activity in the brain, it is not known 
if this activity itself forms consciousness or if brain activity correlates with a different 
thing altogether that we call “the mind” or consciousness (Figure 41). If consciousness is 
not simply brain activity, this suggests that the material universe is just one aspect of 
reality and that consciousness is part of a parallel reality in which entirely different rules 
apply.
MONISM AND DUALISM
The philosophical stands of those positing the relation between mind and body can be 
broadly brought under two divisions: monism and dualism. According to the former, 
every phenomenon in the universe can be ultimately reduced to a material thing. 
Consciousness too is identical to the brain activity that correlates with it. However, the 
fact that not every physical thing has consciousness is because only in those physical 
bodies where complex physical processes evolved over a long period of time did 
cognitive mechanism develop. Thus, consciousness never existed in parallel with the 
material universe as an independent entity of its own.
According to the latter, consciousness is not physical but exists in another dimension to 
the material universe. Certain brain processes are associated with the consciousness, but 
they are not identical to each other. Some dualists believe consciousness may even exist 
without the brain processes associated with it.
LOCATING CONSCIOUSNESS
Human consciousness arises from the interaction of every part of a person with their 
environment. We know that the brain plays the major role in producing conscious 
awareness but we do not know exactly how. Certain processes within the brain, and 
neuronal activity in particular areas, correlate reliably with conscious states, while others 
do not.
Page 34 of 35
Different types of neuronal activity in the brain are associated with the emergence of 
conscious awareness. Neuronal activity in the cortex, and particularly in the frontal lobes, 
is associated with the arousal of conscious experience. It takes up to half a second for a 
stimulus to become conscious after it has first been registered in the brain. Initially, the 
neuronal activity triggered by the stimulus occurs in the “lower” areas of the brain, such 
as the amygdala and thalamus, and then in the “higher” brain, in the parts of the cortex 
that process sensations. The frontal cortex is activated usually only when an experience 
becomes conscious, suggesting that the involvement of this part of the brain may be an 
essential component of consciousness.
REQUIREMENTS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Every state of conscious awareness has a specific pattern of brain activity associated with 
it. These are commonly referred to as the neural correlates of consciousness. For 
example, seeing a patch of yellow produces one pattern of brain activity, seeing 
grandparents, another. If the brain state changes from one pattern to another, so does the 
experience of consciousness. Consciousness arises only when brain cells fire at fairly 
high rates. So, neural activity must be complex for consciousness to occur, but not too 
complex. If all the neurons are firing, such as in an epileptic seizure, consciousness is 
lost. The processes relevant to consciousness are generally assumed to be found at the 
level of brain cells rather than at the level of individual molecules or atoms. Yet it is also 
possible that consciousness does arise at the far smaller atomic (quantum) level, and if so 
it may be subject to very different laws.
Many neuroscientists hold the philosophical view of materialism; that there is only one 
fundamental substance in the universe and that is physical material. How, then, is 
subjective experience of the mind explained? Through a process known as emergence. 
Emergence is a process described as the production of a phenomenon from the 
interactions or processes of several other phenomena. For example, the molecule that is 
water is composed of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. The hydrogen and 
oxygen atoms on their own do not have the quality of wetness that water has. But when 
you combine them to form the molecule, and you have enough water molecules, then the 
property of wetness emerges from those interactions. Neuroscientists use this as an 
analogy, and argue that when many neurons are combined, consciousness emerges from 
those interactions. This analogy serves as a useful description within the viewpoint of 
materialism, but it is not an explanation, as we have yet to demonstrate the mechanisms 
involved in such an emergence.