Speech Rights of Adults
Much of the material targeted by age verification laws is protected speech when accessed by adults. With
respect to pornography, sexual content that depicts adults but is not legally obscene is protected speech
with respect to adults even if it might qualify as speech “harmful to minors.” With respect to social media,
the Supreme Court has recognized that social media enables individuals to “engage in a wide array of
protected First Amendment activity.”
A law may burden adult speech even if it specifically targets material accessed by minors. The Supreme
Court’s decision in Reno struck down the Communications Decency Act (CDA) primarily on the basis
that the law would impermissibly burden adult speech. The reasons for believing the CDA would burden
adult speech may apply to contemporary age verification laws. The Reno court determined that the CDA’s
ban on transmitting indecent material to minors would burden adult speech “in the absence of a viable age
verification process,” because distributors of material would fear liability for transmitting material to
minors. The Court also observed that a website operator’s decision to adopt age verification may block
adults from lawful content if the adults lack material required for verification, such as a credit card.
Lower courts have suggested that age verification may further burden adult speech by deterring adult
users who are not willing to provide identifying information to access potentially embarrassing content. In
a different context, the Supreme Court held that a requirement that cable television operators block sexual
programming unless a viewer requests access to the programming in writing would “restrict viewing by
[cable] subscribers who fear for their reputations” should their request be made public.
Speech Rights of Minors
Minors, like adults, possess free speech rights under the First Amendment. The Supreme Court has
repeatedly held that, except in “relatively narrow and well-defined circumstances,” government has no
more power to restrict speech for minors than it does for adults. Laws that target social media websites
may fall outside these “narrow” circumstances. The Supreme Court has struck down other laws that
attempted to restrict the dissemination of protected speech to minors, including laws involving violent
video games and movies with nudity. Social media allows minors to access a broad array of protected
speech, meaning a law restricting minors’ access to social media may have a greater impact on minors’
speech rights than narrower laws the Supreme Court has previously struck down.
Pornography age verification laws may also impact minors’ access to constitutionally protected material.
State laws that seek to mandate age verification for pornography often apply to “material harmful to
minors,” a term that tracks the language used by the Supreme Court in Ginsberg v. New York and Miller v.
California. Although the Supreme Court has upheld restrictions on physical distribution of material
harmful to minors, federal appellate courts have raised issues with such restrictions as they might apply
on the internet. For example, the Third Circuit held in multiple decisions that COPA’s definition of
“material that is harmful to minors” was unconstitutionally vague and overbroad.
The Miller definition of obscenity depends on whether “the average person, applying contemporary
community standards” would find that the material in question “appeals to the prurient interest.”
Definitions of material “harmful to minors” incorporate this language and specify that the question is
whether someone “applying contemporary community standards” would find the material “appeals to the
prurient interest” of minors. In cases that involve physical distribution of offensive material, the relevant
“community standards” are those of the material’s recipient. The Third Circuit observed that applying a
“contemporary community standards” requirement to internet communications, which are typically
available worldwide, would subject all material on the internet to the standards of “the most puritanical
communities.” The Supreme Court has not decided how to apply “contemporary community standards” to
internet communications, beyond concluding that the use of “contemporary community standards” alone
did not render COPA unconstitutional. Some Justices have expressed support for a nationwide
Congressional Research Service 4
“community standard,” while other Justices have suggested that the standards should depend on where
material is received, as is the case with laws that do not involve the internet.