Best New Cars for Teens Under $30,000
 2024 Toyota Prius
 Starting Price: $29,045 | Rating: 4.8
 2024 Toyota Prius Limited
 The Toyota Prius is the car that made “hybrid” a household word. Toyota redesigned the Prius for 2023, molding it into the sleek shape of a speedster. Well, it’s not that. However, it still manages an impressive combined driving fuel economy of 57 mpg. Students heading for the snow belt can add all-wheel drive (AWD). Its rear-seat legroom is about average for the segment.
 

 The IIHS named the Prius to its Top Safety Pick+ list. Every Prius comes with automatic emergency braking with pedestrian detection, lane-departure warning with steering assist, adaptive cruise control, lane-keeping assist, and high-beam assist. Blind-spot monitoring and rear cross-traffic alert come standard as well. If the new models are out of your price range, the previous-generation Prius is also an excellent choice. See Toyota Prius models for sale near you
 

 Compare dealer offers
 

 2024 Honda Civic
 Starting Price: $25,045 | Rating: 4.7
 2024 Honda Civic Sedan in red driving on a road.
 The Civic made our list of picks for several reasons, including the fact that it’s a frequent Kelley Blue Book Best Buy Award winner. In addition, the all-new Civic retook the throne as our Compact Car Best Buy for 2022 and repeated for 2023 and 2024. The IIHS named it a Top Safety Pick, and it earned a 5-Star safety rating from NHTSA. It also gets a government-estimated 36 mpg in combined driving.
 

 Every 2024 Civic arrives with the Honda Sensing suite of driver aids, including forward collision warning, auto emergency braking, lane-departure warning, lane-keeping assist, and adaptive cruise control. Connectivity technology includes Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, one USB port, and Bluetooth connectivity. Honda typically doesn’t offer option packages. To gain more content, you must move up in trim level. And look to the hatchback model ($26,045) for more cargo space. See Honda Civic models for sale near you
 

 Compare dealer offers
 

 2024 Toyota Corolla
 Starting Price: $23,145 | Rating: 4.4
 2023 Toyota Corolla in white near a lake.
 The carryover Toyota Corolla was an IIHS Top Safety Pick for 2023. It also boasts low cost-to-own figures and historically good reliability. The Corolla’s starting price reflects the entry-level LE model. It offers standard equipment like automatic climate control, remote keyless entry, and a rear-seat center armrest.
 

 Every 2024 Corolla comes with Toyota’s Safety Sense 3.0. This advanced driver assistance technology suite includes pre-collision with pedestrian detection, automatic emergency braking, adaptive cruise control, lane-departure warning, lane-keeping assist, traffic sign recognition, and automatic high beams.
 

 The optional Premium Package offers a blind-spot monitor with a rear cross-traffic alert system, which is great for teen drivers. Connectivity features include Bluetooth, voice recognition, four USB ports, Amazon Alexa, Apple CarPlay, Android Auto, and Wi-Fi capability. The Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) government-certified combined fuel economy is 35 mpg. See Toyota Corolla models for sale near you
 

 Compare dealer offers
 

 2024 Kia Seltos
 Starting Price: $25,865 | Rating: 4.8
 2024 Kia Seltos SX in white near Palm Springs at sunset.
 Every version of the surprisingly roomy Kia Seltos subcompact SUV comes with a full suite of safety features, including forward collision warning with emergency braking, driver attention warning, lane-departure warning, lane-keeping assist, lane centering, and high-beam assist. To add blind-spot monitoring and rear cross-traffic alert, you must move up to the S grade, adding $600 to the bottom line.
 

 Connectivity features include Bluetooth with voice recognition, Apple CarPlay, Android Auto, and one USB port. With a second-row seat large enough to accommodate adults, Seltos also provides class-leading cargo space. See Kia Seltos models for sale near you
 

 Compare dealer offers
 

 2024 Subaru Crosstrek
 Starting Price: $26,540 | Rating: 4.6
 2024 Subaru Crosstrek in blue near white fence.
 Redesigned for 2024, Subaru’s go-anywhere Crosstrek is an IIHS Top Safety Pick. It comes standard with AWD backed by a continuously variable automatic transmission (CVT). Fuel economy is a respectable 29 mpg combined or 27 in Wilderness trim.
 

 Every Crosstrek comes standard with Subaru’s EyeSight Driver Assist Technology. It also boasts forward collision warning with automatic emergency braking, lane-keeping assist, and adaptive cruise control. A blind-spot monitor with rear cross-traffic alert is optional or standard on upper trim levels. Connectivity includes dual 7-inch touchscreens, Apple CarPlay, Android Auto (wireless is an option), Bluetooth connectivity, and hands-free phone integration. See Subaru Crosstrek models for sale near you
 

 Compare dealer offers
 

 2024 Hyundai Kona
 Starting Price: $25,625 | Rating: 4.8
 2024 Hyundai Kona Limited in Mirage Green with hills in the background.
 Totally redesigned for 2024, the Hyundai Kona offers tremendous value as a subcompact SUV with eye-catching exterior styling. Its small size makes parking easy, a big plus for teens. The rear cargo area is well suited to carry gear. In addition, Apple CarPlay and Android Auto connectivity come standard. Fuel economy is as good as 35 mpg on the highway with the gas engine. An all-electric version (EV) is also available.
 

 The IIHS named the Kona to the TSP+ list. There is plenty of value here, as even the base SE model comes standard with blind-spot monitoring, lane-keeping assist, forward collision-avoidance assist, lane-change assist, and rear cross-traffic collision warning. A 12.3-inch touchscreen and wireless Apple CarPlay and Android Auto are also included. See Hyundai Kona models for sale near you
 

 Compare dealer offers
 

 2024 Chevrolet Trailblazer
 Starting Price: $24,395 | Rating: 4.2
 2024 Chevrolet Trailblazer ACTIV in white near a cabin.
 Being one of Chevy’s smaller SUVs doesn’t stop the Trailblazer from being a considerable value. Some exterior restyling for 2024 dramatically improves its curb appeal. Moreover, the increased number of standard features for 2024 makes it more fetching than ever. Its standard advanced safety features include automatic forward emergency braking with pedestrian detection, lane-keeping assist, and lane departure warning. High-beam assist is also standard. We recommend opting for the $345 Driver Confidence Package that adds blind-spot monitoring and rear cross-traffic alert. It’s a bargain. Fundamentally unchanged since the IIHS named it a TSP+ winner in 2022, the Trailblazer remains a safe pick for teens.
 

 With the most rear-seat legroom in its class and a little better than average cargo space, the Trailblazer is an impressive hauler. At 30 mpg, its combined fuel economy is above average among rivals. You can add AWD for $2,000. See Chevrolet Trailblazer models for sale near you
 

 Compare dealer offers
 

 2024 Nissan Sentra
 Starting Price: $22,320 | Rating: 4.0
 2024 Nissan Sentra SR in blue near a directional sign.
 The most affordable new car on this list, the Nissan Sentra offers a bit of sportiness for teens, plus practicality and upscale styling. This compact car has “zero gravity” seats designed to be comfortable when driving to school or a job. The Sentra delivers fuel economy as good as 40 mpg on the highway (34 mpg in mixed city/highway driving), so trips to the gas station won’t be too frequent. Apple CarPlay and Android Auto are standard on all models.
 

 In addition to 10 airbags, even the base grade comes with the full suite of SafetyShield 360 driver aids, including auto emergency braking with pedestrian detection, rear cross-traffic alert, rear automatic braking, blind-spot warning, lane-departure warning, and high-beam assist. Essentially unchanged since it was added to the IIHS 2022 TSP+ list, the Sentra is still a solid safety pick for teens.