high blood pressure 
 People who have consistent high blood pressure (hypertension) in mid-life (ages 45 to 65) are more likely to develop dementia compared to those with normal blood pressure.
 

 High blood pressure can increase the risk of developing dementia, particularly vascular dementia, because of its effect on the heart, the arteries, and blood circulation.
 

 Smoking 
 The evidence is strong and consistent that smokers are at a higher risk of developing dementia vs. non-smokers or ex-smokers.
 

 It’s never too late to quit! Smokers who quit can reduce their risk of developing dementia.
 

 diabetes 
 People with type 2 diabetes in mid-life (ages 45 to 65) are at an increased risk of developing dementia, particularly Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia.
 

 Obesity
 Obesity in mid-life (ages 45 to 65) increases the risk of developing dementia. Obesity also increases the risk of developing other risk factors such as type 2 diabetes.
 

 lack of physical activity 
 Physical inactivity in later life (ages 65 and up) increases the risk of developing dementia.
 

 poor diet
 An unhealthy diet, high in saturated fat, sugar, and salt, can increase the risk of developing many illnesses, including dementia and cardiovascular disease.
 

 high alcohol consumption 
 Drinking excessively (more than 12 drinks per week), can increase your risk of developing dementia
 

 low cognitive engagement 
 Cognitive engagement is thought to support the development of a
 “cognitive reserve”. This is the idea that people who actively use their brains throughout their lives may be more protected against brain cell damage caused by dementia.
 

 depression 
 People who experience depression in mid- or later life have a higher risk of developing dementia. However, the relationship between depression and dementia is still unclear.
 

 Many researchers believe that depression is a risk factor for dementia, whereas others believe it may be an early symptom of the disease, or both.
 

 traumatic brain injury 
 People who experience severe or repeated head injuries are at increased risk of developing dementia. Brain injuries may trigger a process that might eventually lead to dementia.
 

 This particularly affects athletes in boxing, soccer, hockey, and football, which often have repeated head injuries.
 

 Falls are the leading cause of traumatic brain injury. Falling is especially dangerous for older adults.
 

 hearing loss
 Mild levels of hearing loss increase the risk of cognitive decline and dementia. Though it is still unclear how exactly it affects cognitive decline, hearing loss can lead to social isolation, loss of independence, and problems with everyday activities.
 

 social isolation
 Social isolation can increase the risk of hypertension, coronary heart disease, depression, and dementia.
 

 Staying socially active may reduce the risk of dementia. Social interaction may also help slow down the progression of the disease.
 

 air pollution
 The relationship between air pollution and dementia is still unclear. However, it’s estimated that those living close to busy roads have a higher risk of dementia because they may be exposed to higher levels of air pollution from vehicle emissions.
 

 It’s never too soon, or too late, to make changes that will maintain or improve your brain health. Learn more about managing some of these risk factors.