MOOD SWINGS IN WOMEN DUE TO HORMONE
IMBALANCE
A mood swing is defined as “an abrupt and apparently unaccountable change of mood.”
Mood swings can be triggered by any number of events or situations, but in many
cases, the root cause of a mood swing is a shift in hormone levels. One minute you are
feeling elated and happy, but the next you are expressing anger and hostility. Mood
swings are common in women who are experiencing hormonal fluctuations due to
physiological events, such menstruation or menopause. Chronic mood swings can
significantly affect a woman’s health and are often the result of a hormonal imbalance.
The good news is that mood swings is another hormonal imbalance symptom that could
be treated safely and effectively with hormone therapy.
What Causes Mood Swings?
Mood swings can be a side effect of lifestyle choices, life events or physiological
changes, including:
Stress
It’s no secret that stress influences mood. Stress has a number of effects on the body—
physical and psychological. Hormones and neurotransmitters that regulate mood can be
affected by stress levels. Too much stress can cause cortisol levels to rise, leading to
fatigue, poor sleep and appetite changes, further impacting changes in mood and
behavior.
Psychiatric Issues
Mood disorders are not always related to a hormonal imbalance. In some cases,
psychological disorders or mental health conditions may be to blame. ADHD (attention
deficit hyperactive disorder), bipolar disorder, panic disorder and depression are just a
few examples of psychological issues that may cause mood swings.
PMS (premenstrual syndrome)
For many women, uncomfortable symptoms can occur approximately one to two weeks
before menstruation. This period of time is known as PMS, or premenstrual syndrome.
Premenstrual mood swings are just one symptoms and may be influenced by other
common symptoms, including bloating, fatigue, changes in appetite and depression.
The cause of these symptoms is related to shifts in progesterone and estrogen levels,
which rise and fall throughout the full menstrual cycle.
PMDD (premenstrual dysmorphic disorder)
PMDD, or premenstrual dysmorphic disorder, is a more severe form of PMS, affecting
approximately 8 percent of premenopausal women. The symptoms of PMDD are similar
to those experienced with PMS, but mood swings tend to be more extreme, along with
other emotions, such irritability, sadness, and anxiety. The cause of PMDD is not well
understood, but it is speculated that it is the effect of an abnormal response of the brain
to hormonal shifts that occur before menstruation leading to a deficiency in the
neurotransmitter, serotonin.
Menopause
Mood swings are one of the most common symptoms of menopause. During
perimenopause, severe mood swings can occur due to hormonal shifts affecting
estrogen and progesterone. The hormonal shifts are generally more extreme in the
earlier phases of the transition into menopause. Other menopausal symptoms, such as
hot flashes and night sweats, can cause undue stress, poor sleep and anxiety that can
lead to mood swings as well.
Thyroid Dysfunction
Thyroid dysfunction can influence mood and cause mood swings. Hypothyroidism can
be the result of low thyroid hormone and high cortisol levels. This can affect sleep,
energy and appetite, all of which can impact mood.
Hormonal Imbalance
In general, out of balance hormones can affect mood. Estrogen and progesterone are
well-known for their role in female physiology and fluctuate frequently throughout the
female life cycle. However, other hormones may become imbalanced due to age or
illness and cause mood swings. For example, low testosterone in women can impact
energy, weight, and sex drive. High cortisol can lead to anxiety, sleeplessness, and
weight gain. Any of these factors can cause mood swings simply due to the effects on a
woman’`s lifestyle or overall health and wellbeing.
How Mood Swings Affect Women&’s Health**
Mood swings can damage relationships, interfere with work productivity and limit social
interactions. This can negatively affect your mental health and become a source of
stress—both of which can increase the risk of more serious disease.
If your mood swings are more than occasional bouts of moodiness before your period or
after a particularly bad day, it might be time to seek help. Identifying the root cause of
your mood swings with the help of a qualified professional can you ensure you get the
most effective treatment.
Female Hormone Balance Therapy for Mood Swings
Mood swings are not something any woman should ignore. If you are experiencing
frequent mood swings, seek help from a qualified professional. If your mood swings are
related to a hormonal imbalance, you are likely experiencing other symptoms or events
in your lifecycle.
For example, women who are perimenopausal will likely be experiencing hot flashes,
foggy thinking or joint pain along with mood swings. If you have a thyroid disorder, you
may notice that your mood swings are accompanied by feeling tired all the time, a
change in appetite and an inability to regulate your body temperature. These are signs
that your mood swings may be related to a hormonal imbalance.
Advanced lab testing can help pinpoint which hormones are out of balance and may
causing your mood swings and other symptoms. Following lab testing, you can meet
with one of the expert physicians of the BodyLogicMD network for a one-on-one
consultation. Each practitioner is highly trained and specializes in hormone health and
balance. He/she will review your lab results, discuss your symptoms and medical
history, as well as come to understand how your life has been affected by hormone
imbalance. Your doctor will partner with you to develop a comprehensive treatment plan
that will correct any hormone imbalance safely and effectively to help relieve you from
the unwelcome symptoms, like mood swings.
Your treatment plan may include bioidentical hormone replacement therapy to restore
hormone balance, along with nutritional guidance, fitness recommendations, stressreduction techniques and pharmaceutical-grade supplements. Each element in your
treatment plan will be designed to fit your lifestyle, while ensuring your medical needs
are met and your wellness goals are achieved.