These are the main findings from our industry survey, drawn from a strategic sample of more
than 300 digital leaders from more than 50 countries and territories.
• Just half (47%) of our sample of editors, CEOs, and digital executives say they are
confident about the prospects for journalism in the year ahead, with around one-tenth
(12%) expressing low confidence. Stated concerns relate to rising costs, declining
advertising revenue, and a slowing in subscription growth – as well as increasing
legal and physical harassment. Reasons to be cheerful include the hope that closely
fought elections in the US and elsewhere could boost consumption and interest, albeit
temporarily and with the potential for further damage to trust.
• Almost two-thirds (63%) of our survey respondents say they are worried about a sharp
decline in referral traffic from social media sites. Data sourced for this report from
analytics provider Chartbeat shows that traffic to news sites from Facebook fell 48% in
2023, with traffic from X/Twitter declining by 27%. In response to these developments,
around three-quarters (77%) say they will focus more on their own direct channels in
the next year, with a fifth (22%) resorting to cutting costs and a similar proportion (20%)
experimenting with alternative third-party platforms.
• More specifically, publishers say they’ll be putting more effort into WhatsApp (+61 net
score)2 and Instagram (+39) following Meta’s decision to open up broadcast channels for
publishers. Interest in video networks such as TikTok (+55) and YouTube (+44) remain
strong while Google Discover is becoming a more important but volatile referral source.
By contrast, publisher sentiment towards Facebook has worsened further this year (-38
net score) along with X/Twitter (-39 net score).
• Related to the above, the majority of our publisher respondents say they plan to create more video (+64 net score), more newsletters (+52), and more podcasts (+47), but broadly
the same number of news articles – as they lean into some of the few remaining areas of audience and advertiser growth. Around half (54%) of respondents admit their companies
are mostly focused on maximising attention rather than being more respectful of their audience’s time (37%).
• The twin dangers of selective news avoidance and news fatigue remain a major source of concern for media companies looking to sustain interest in news from Gaza and Ukraine, amongst other difficult stories. Strategies that publishers consider very important to counter these trends include better explanation of complex stories (67%), more solutionsoriented or constructive approaches to storytelling (44%), and more inspirational human stories (43%). There was less support for commissioning more positive (21%) or entertaining (18%) news.
• On the business side, publishers continue to invest in subscription and membership, with a large majority of those surveyed (80%) saying this will be an important revenue stream,
ahead of both display and native advertising. Most of those operating a paid model report either a slight increase, or stable subscription numbers in the last year, despite the
difficult economic outlook.
• As a number of publishers aim to do lucrative licensing deals with AI platforms this year, there is little optimism that any benefits will be equally shared. In our survey a third (35%) of respondents believed that most of the money would go to big publishers.
Around half (48%) felt that, at the end of the day, there would be very little money for any publisher.
• Using AI for back-end news automation (56%) is considered the most important use of
the technology by publisher respondents, followed by offering better recommendations
(37%) and commercial uses (28%). Publishers are ambivalent about using AI for content
creation, which is considered the biggest reputational risk by over half of respondents.
• Experimental interfaces to the internet such as AR and VR glasses, lapel pins, and other
wearable devices will be a feature of the year ahead. But existing voice activated devices
such as headphones and smart speakers, as they get upgraded with AI technologies, are
considered by respondents to be the most likely option (41%) to displace – or at least
supplement – the smartphone in the medium term.