ACTS OF 1949 


AN ACT concerning public health, providing for State and local health 
officials and personnel, prescribing their powers and duties, estab- 
lishing a public health code and providing for the administration 
of public health laws, prescribing penalties, repealing certain laws, 
and declaring an emergency. 


ARTICLE 1. ADMINISTRATION OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
Part 1. State Board of Health 


Division 2. Powers and Duties 




Sec. 200. The state board of health is the superior health board 
of the state, to which all other health boards are subordinate. 




Sec. 201. The state board shall have supervision of the health and 
life of the citizens of the state and shall possess all powers necessary 
to fulfill the duties prescribed in the statutes and to bring action in the 
courts for the enforcement of health laws and health rules. 




Sec. 202. The state board may establish, operate and maintain 
branch offices, the number of which shall be determined by the board, 
the purpose and intent in authorizing the creation of said branch offices 
being to furnish a more comprehensive and effective health program to 
the people of the state and further to render additional assistance to all 
local health officials. The legislative intent of this provision is to author- 
ize such establishment as a means of assisting, but in no sense limiting 
the powers now possessed by all existing local health agencies. 




Sec. 203. For the purpose of providing facilities for branch offices 
the state board may, with the approval of the governor purchase real 
estate. For such purpose real estate may be leased. Structures may be 
remodeled, repaired, constructed and maintained except that no build- 
ing may be constructed upon property not owned in fee simple by the 
state. All deeds and leases shall be made to the State of Indiana for the 
use of the state board of health. Such procedures and powers shall be 
exercised under the provisions of Chapter 279 of the Acts of 1947 where 
the same are applicable. 




Sec. 204. The state board shall study the vital statistics and en- 
deavor to make intelligent and profitable use of the collected records 
of death and sickness among the people. 




Sec. 205. The state board may make sanitary inspections and sur- 
veys in all parts of the state and of all public buildings and institutions; 
and, after due notice, may enter upon and inspect private property in 
regard to the presence of cases of infectious and contagious diseases and 
the possible cause and source of diseases. 




Sec. 206. The state board may establish quarantine and may do and 
execute what is reasonable and necessary for the prevention and suppres- 
sion of disease. 




Sec. 207. The state board may order schools and churches closed 
and forbid public gatherings when deemed necessary to prevent and stop 
epidemics. 




Sec. 208. The state board may make an order condemning or abat- 
ing conditions causative of disease. 




Src. 209. The state board may enforce all laws and regulations eon- 
cerning the character and location of plumbing, drainage, water supply, 
disposal of sewage, lighting, heating and ventilation and all sanitary 
features of all public buildings and institutions. It may make regulations 
concerning any of the above in all instances where jurisdiction is not 
vested in some other state agency. 




Sec. 210. The state board shall provide facilities and personnel for 
investigation, research and dissemination of knowledge to the public 
concerning the health of persons of middle and advanced age and diseases 
common thereto, concerning dental public health and also concerning 
conditions in all places of employment within the state which may be re- 
sponsible for the development of occupational diseases. 




Sec. 211. On or before the first day of September, the state board 
shall make an annual report to the governor of its transactions and 
expenditures for the preceding fiscal year, with suggestions in regard to 
legislation deemed important to the public health. 




Sec. 212. The state board may by an affirmative vote of a majority 
of its members establish and from time to time amend and repeal reason- 
able rules in order to protect or to improve the public health in this state. 
The rules may concern but shall not be limited to: 




1. nuisances dangerous to public health. 




2. the pollution of any water supply other than where jurisdiction 
is in the Stream Pollution Control Board. 


8. the disposition of excremental and sewage matter. 


4. the control of fly and mosquito breeding places. 


5. the detection, reporting, prevention, and control of diseases 
which affect public health. 


6. the care of maternity and infant cases and the conduct of 
maternity homes. 


7. the production, distribution, and sale of human food. 


8. the conduct of camps. 


9. standards of cleanliness of eating facilities for the public. 








10. standards of cleanliness of sanitary facilities offered for public 
use. 


11. the handling, disposal, disinterment, and reburial of dead human 
bodies. 




12. vital statistics. 


13. regulating and prescribing sanitary conditions and facilities in 
public buildings and grounds as illustrated by but not limited to 
plumbing, drainage, sewerage, water supply, lighting, heating, 
and ventilation other than where jurisdiction is vested by law in 
the Administrative Building Council. 


14. the administration of the laws of this state which require an 
examination for the discovery of syphilis prior to the application 
for or the issuance of a marriage license. 




Sec. 218. The rules of the state board shall not be inconsistent with 
the provisions of this act or of any other law of this state. 




Sec. 214. The state board shall establish, amend, or repeal a rule 
in accordance with the provisions of the statutes of this state concerning 
the establishment and promulgation of rules. After promulgation, rules 
of the state board shall have the force and effect of law. 




Sec. 215. When, in the opinion of the state board, any local health 
authority shall fail or refuse to enforce the laws and regulations neces- 
sary to prevent and control the spread of communicable or infectious 
disease declared to be dangerous to the public health, or when, in the 
opinion of the state board, a public health emergency exists, the state 
board may enforce the rules and regulations of the state board within the 
territorial jurisdiction of such local health authorities, and for that pur- 
pose shall have and may exercise all the powers given by law to local 
health authorities. All expenses so incurred shall be a charge against the 
respective counties or cities. In such cases the failure or refusal of any 
local health officer or local health board to carry out and enforce the 
lawful orders and regulations of the state board shall be sufficient cause 
for the removal of such local health officer or the members of such local 
health board from office, and upon such removal the proper county or city 
authorities shall at once appoint a successor, other than the person or 
persons removed, as provided by law for original appointments. 




Sec. 216. The state board may remove any local health officer in 
the state either for intemperance, failure to collect vital statistics, obey 
rules, keep records, make reports, answer letters of inquiry of the state 
board concerning the health of the people or neglect of official duty. 




Sec. 217. No local health officer shall be removed by the state board 
except under the procedure provided by law for the removal of an officer 
or employee for cause by a state officer or agency. 




Sec. 218. Any health officer removed as herein provided shall be 
ineligible to hold the position of health officer for four years, and the 
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the 
original appointment or employment. ; 




Src. 219. The state board shall have power and authority to estab- 
lish minimum qualifications for full-time local health officers and other 
full-time local health personnel which are not in conflict with the pro- 
visions of this act. 




Src. 220. Whenever a hearing is provided for or authorized to be 
held by the state board, the said state board may designate a person as 
its agent or representative to conduct such hearings. Such agent or repre- 
sentative shall conduct such hearing in the manner provided by law. 




Sec. 221. The state board may adopt rules and regulations for the 
efficient enforcement of any of the provisions of this act. 




Sec. 222. All valid rules and regulations heretofore made by the 
state board which are in force and effect on the effective date of this 
act are hereby continued in full force and effect until and unless amended 
or repealed as provided by law. 
