2.1 Overarching principles of tax policy
In a context where many governments have to cope with less revenue, 
increasing expenditures and resulting fiscal constraints, raising revenue 
remains the most important function of taxes, which serve as the primary 
means for financing public goods such as maintenance of law and order and 
public infrastructure. Assuming a certain level of revenue that needs to be 
raised, which depends on the broader economic and fiscal policies of the 
country concerned, there are a number of broad tax policy considerations 
that have traditionally guided the development of taxation systems. These 
include neutrality, efficiency, certainty and simplicity, effectiveness and 
fairness, as well as flexibility. In the context of work leading up to the Report 
on the Taxation of Electronic Commerce (see Annex A for further detail), 
these overarching principles were the basis for the 1998 Ottawa Ministerial 
Conference, and are since then referred to as the Ottawa Taxation Framework 
Conditions. At the time, these principles were deemed appropriate for an 
evaluation of the taxation issues related to e-commerce. Although most of 
the new business models identified in Chapter 4 did not exist yet at the time, 
these principles, with modification, continue to be relevant in the digital 
economy, as discussed in Chapter 8. In addition to these well-recognised 
principles, equity is an important consideration for the design of tax policy.
• Neutrality: Taxation should seek to be neutral and equitable 
between forms of business activities. A neutral tax will contribute 
to efficiency by ensuring that optimal allocation of the means 
of production is achieved. A distortion, and the corresponding 
deadweight loss, will occur when changes in price trigger different 
changes in supply and demand than would occur in the absence of 
tax. In this sense, neutrality also entails that the tax system raises 
revenue while minimising discrimination in favour of, or against, 
any particular economic choice. This implies that the same principles 
of taxation should apply to all forms of business, while addressing 
specific features that may otherwise undermine an equal and neutral 
application of those principles.
• Efficiency: Compliance costs to business and administration costs 
for governments should be minimised as far as possible.
• Certainty and simplicity: Tax rules should be clear and simple to 
understand, so that taxpayers know where they stand. A simple tax 
system makes it easier for individuals and businesses to understand 
their obligations and entitlements. As a result, businesses are more 
likely to make optimal decisions and respond to intended policy 
choices. Complexity also favours aggressive tax planning, which may 
trigger deadweight losses for the economy.
ADDRESSING THE TAX CHALLENGES OF THE DIGITAL ECONOMY © OECD 2014
2. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION – 31
• Effectiveness and fairness: Taxation should produce the right 
amount of tax at the right time, while avoiding both double taxation 
and unintentional non-taxation. In addition, the potential for 
evasion and avoidance should be minimised. Prior discussions in 
the Technical Advisory Groups (TAGs) considered that if there is 
a class of taxpayers that are technically subject to a tax, but are 
never required to pay the tax due to inability to enforce it, then the 
taxpaying public may view the tax as unfair and ineffective. As 
a result, the practical enforceability of tax rules is an important 
consideration for policy makers. In addition, because it influences 
the collectability and the administerability of taxes, enforceability is 
crucial to ensure efficiency of the tax system.
• Flexibility: Taxation systems should be flexible and dynamic 
enough to ensure they keep pace with technological and commercial 
developments. It is important that a tax system is dynamic and 
flexible enough to meet the current revenue needs of governments 
while adapting to changing needs on an ongoing basis. This means 
that the structural features of the system should be durable in a 
changing policy context, yet flexible and dynamic enough to allow 
governments to respond as required to keep pace with technological 
and commercial developments, taking into account that future 
developments will often be difficult to predict.
Equity is also an important consideration within a tax policy framework. 
Equity has two main elements; horizontal equity and vertical equity. 
Horizontal equity suggests that taxpayers in similar circumstances should 
bear a similar tax burden. Vertical equity is a normative concept, whose 
definition can differ from one user to another. According to some, it suggests 
that taxpayers in better circumstances should bear a larger part of the tax 
burden as a proportion of their income. In practice, the interpretation of 
vertical equity depends on the extent to which countries want to diminish 
income variation and whether it should be applied to income earned in 
a specific period or to lifetime income. Equity is traditionally delivered 
through the design of the personal tax and transfer systems.
Equity may also refer to inter-nation equity. As a theory, inter-nation 
equity is concerned with the allocation of national gain and loss in the 
international context and aims to ensure that each country receives an 
equitable share of tax revenues from cross-border transactions (OECD, 
2001). The tax policy principle of inter-nation equity has been an important 
consideration in the debate on the division of taxing rights between source 
and residence countries. At the time of the Ottawa work on the taxation of 
electronic commerce, this important concern was recognised by stating that 
“any adaptation of the existing international taxation principles should be 
ADDRESSING THE TAX CHALLENGES OF THE DIGITAL ECONOMY © OECD 2014
32 – 2. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION
structured to maintain fiscal sovereignty of countries, […] to achieve a fair 
sharing of the tax base from electronic commerce between countries…” 
(OECD, 2001: 228).
Tax policy choices often reflect decisions by policy makers on the relative 
importance of each of these principles and will also reflect wider economic 
and social policy considerations outside the field of tax.