2010 Personal Financial Planning Attitudes - A Study Scott A. Yetmar Cleveland State University,
s.yetmar@csuohio.edu D. Murphy Follow this and additional works at:
https://engagedscholarship.csuohio.edu/bus_facpub Part of the Finance and Financial Management
Commons How does access to this work benefit you? Let us know! Original Published Citation Yetmar,
S., Murphy, D. (2010). Personal Financial Planning Attitudes - A Study. Management Research Review/
Emerald Publications, 33(8), pp. 811 – 817. This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the
Monte Ahuja College of Business at EngagedScholarship@CSU. It has been accepted for inclusion in
Business Faculty Publications by an authorized administrator of EngagedScholarship@CSU. For more
information, please contact library.es@csuohio.edu. Personal financial planning attitudes: a preliminary
study of graduate students David S. Murphy School of Business and Economics, Lynchburg College,
Lynchburg, Virginia, USA, and Scott Yetmar College of Business Administration, Cleveland State
University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA Abstract Purpose - The purpose of this paper is to report on a survey
about the personal financial planning attitudes of MBA students in the USA.
Design/methodology/approach - The study surveyed 206 MBA students about their attitudes to
personal financial planning. Participants were asked about their level of knowledge, whether they had
prepared components of a financial plan, where they might seek assistance in such a process and the
criteria for selecting a financial planner. In addition, participants were asked to indicate their level of
confidence in a financial plan's capacity to help them meet their long-term needs and the likelihood that
they would implement such a plan. Findings - The findings indicate that, while most respondents feel
both that financial planning is important and that they are interested in developing a financial plan, very
few feel that they have the necessary skills and knowledge to prepare their own plan. In addition, the
participants indicated a strong preference for professional personal financial planning advice. The study
also indicates that less than 13 percent have prepared a comprehensive personal financial plan. When
asked to identify the one professional from whom they would seek advice, certified financial planners
were the preferred resource. Research limitations/implications - While the results are not generalizable
to the wider population, the views of this group are important because one might expect that educated
individuals would be both more interested in personal financial planning and more capable of prepaJing
their own plans compaJ'ed with average Americans. Practical implications - The study presents some
implications for practice and financial literacy education from a US perspective. Originality/value - A
perceived need of respondents is to feel that their financial planner will put their needs first. While
some professionals believe this to be the hallmark of "independence," the respondents placed less
impOltance on planner independence. In order to foster client confidence, planners must act in ways
that convey clearly the primacy of their clients' needs. Keywords Graduates, United States of America,
Financial services, Personal finance Paper type Research paper Introduction The need for financial
security, especially during retirement years, has been met historically in the United States (USA) in three
ways: personal savings (including insurance and annuities), social insurance programs like social security
and employersponsored pension programs. Employer-sponsored pension programs have been the
cornerstone of these financial security tools. Consequently, pension programs have been the target of
continual legislative actions. The Employee Retimnent Income and Security Act of 1974 made significant
and wide-sweeping changes that affected most aspects of corporate and self-employed pension
programs (that is, legal, tax, investment and actuarial) and initiated 4010,) programs. These changes
lead to an increase in the popularity of defined-contribution pension plans. Number oj participants
Female lVIale Mean age Hig/zest educatiollal/evel Bachelor's degree lVIaster's degree Doctoral degree
Mean years of work experience Number employed in accounting or finance lVIean annual income (USD)
(%) Jl = 206 104 50.98 102 49.02 29.1 years 17l 85.9 23 11.6 5 2.5 6.5 years Table II. 25 12.25
Summary participant 47,558 demographics Attitudes toward planning Participants were asked
specifically whether they thought that preparing a personal financial plan was important; whether they
were interested in preparing such a plan; whether they had time to do so; and whether or not they felt
that they had the necessary skills and knowledge to prepare a personal financial plan. The results of
these four questions are summarized in Table III. It is interesting to note that the percentage of
participants who indicated that they had the skills and knowledge necessary to prepare a personal
financial plan (33 percent) is slightly lower than the percentage of Americans in the University of
Michigan study who had tried to calculate their retirement fund needs (Employee Benefit News, 2005).
Of the 68 participants who indicated that they had the necessary skills and lmowledge to prepare a
personal financial plan, 47 indicated employment in accotmting or finance positions. Only 69 of the
subjects (33.5 percent) indicated that they had prepared a written, comprehensive personal financial
plan. A complete financial plan addresses many issues, some of which are not applicable to all
individuals. Consequently, the participants were also asked to identify plan components that they had
prepared. These results are summarized in Table IV. As evident in Table Iv, the participants in the study
have not prepared many of the components of a comprehensive financial plan. About the same
percentage of participants who reported that they had the skills and knowledge needed to prepare a
financial plan (33 percent) had actually prepared such a plan (33.5 percent). Approximately one in five
participants had prepared an educational funding analysis. Affirmative responses (%) Personal financial
planning is important 156 75.7 Interested in personal financial planning 138 67 Table m. Have the time
to prepare a personal financial plan 83 40 Financial planning Have the skills and knowledge to prepare a
personal financial plan 68 33 interest and knowledge Accountants (CPA) were selected by 19.4 percent
of the respondents. This percentage was divided between CPAlPFS (15.5 percent) and CPAs (3.9
percent). Other financial planning designations (for example, Charted Life Underwriter [CLUJ, Certified
Fund Specialist [CFS] and Charted Financial Consultant [ChFCl) were included in the study but were
selected by only a few participants. Weston (2008) indicates that there are about 250,000 individuals in
the marketplace who identify themselves as financial planners. Of that number, about 56,000 have
earned some kind of professional certification. The CFp® designation appears to be the most popular
with about 58,000 certificate holders (CFP Board, 2008). Participants' reported preference for CFPs® is
consistent with the predominance of CFp® certificate holders in the marketplace. When asked whether
they preferred fee only, fee and compensation or compensation only planners, the majority of
participants (127 or 61.7 percent) indicated that they preferred fee·only planners. Only 30 participants
(14.6 percent) indicated a preference for working with a fee and commission planner while 49 (23.8
percent) indicated that they would seek the advice of a commission only planner. Participants were also
asked to rank six different reasons for selecting a specific planner. The results of their rankings are
shown in Table VI. The most important planner characteristic, as suggested by the participants, is that
the planner places the client's needs first. This predisposition is consistent with the expressed desire by
the majority of the respondents to work with a fee·only planner. The desire that the planner
demonstrates high levels of product familiarity means that fee·only planners must be as familiar with
the products that they recommend, as are commission-only planners. Fee-only planners often use noload funds for plan implementation, products for which they do not receive a commission. Low
transactions costs or the use of commissionfree financial products ranked last in importance among the
participants. Participants ranked freedom of choice third in importance. Thus, it may be important for all
planners to present clients with a menu of choices for plan implementation. Selecting a number of
different funds, for example, with similar risk-return characteristics and time horizons and letting the
client make the final selection may help meet this perceived need. Planner independence and
confidence ranked considerably lower than did meeting clients needs first and product familiarity.
Independence is an attribute often used as a selling point by CPAlPFSs. It appears that this
independence may give them little competitive advantage in the marketplace or at least among
graduate business students. Finally, participants were asked to indicate their level of confidence in a
financial plan's capacity to help them meet their long-term needs (measured on a scale of 1 = not at all
confident to 5 = extremely confident) and the likelihood that they would Criteria Mean ranka SD I want
to know that the planner will put my needs first Planner's familiarity with products I want to preserve
my freedom of choice in product selection I want to feel that the financial planner is confident in hislher
recommendations I want to feel that my planner is independent Reduced transaction costs Note: "1 =
Most important to 6 = least important 1.78 1.61 3.08 1.59 3.37 1.30 3.60 1.48 3.99 1.68 4.86 1.44 Table
VI. Planner selection criteria the majority of them do not view their CPAs as potential providers of
financial planning advice. Very few of the respondents indicated that they would seek the advice of CFS,
ChFC or CLU. These are designations normally held by insurance professionals. This also is surprising
because the most frequently mentioned professional relationship was with an insurance agent. Indeed,
40.7 percent of the respondents had established such a relationship. It appears that both the insurance
and public accounting professions have not had the same success in promoting members of their
professions as personal financial planners. A perceived need by the respondents to feel that their
financial planner will put the client's needs first is clearly apparent in Table VI. While some professionals
may feel that this is the hallmark of "independence", the respondents placed much less importance on a
planner's independence. Thus, to foster a client's confidence, planners must act in ways that very clearly
convey the message to the client that their needs are paramount. References CFP Board of Standards
(2008), "CFP certificant profile", available at: www.cfp.net/media/ profile.asp#link4 (accessed 14
September 2008). Employee Benefit News (2005), "Lack of basic financial knowledge impairs
retirement", available at: www.benefitnews.com/retire/detai1.cfrn?id=8116 (accessed 28 November
2005). Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis (2005), National Economic Trends, available at: http://
research.stlouisfed.org/publicaitons/netl20051101/neL20051108.pdf (accessed 28 November 2005).
Harris Interactive (2005), "Nearly half of US workers participate in a 401(k) or 403(b) plan, New Wall
Street Journal OnlinelHarris interactive personal finance poll", available at: www.
harrisinteractive.comlnews/allnewsbydate.asp?NewsID=976 (accessed 10 October 2005). US
Department of Labor (2005), Preiimillmy Private Pension Plan Bulletin, Abstract of 2000, Form 5500
Annual Reports. Weston, L.P. (2008), 8 Things YOUI' Financial Planner Won't Tell YOIl, available at:
http:// artic1es.moneycentra1.msn.comlRetirementandWills/CreateaPlan/8Things YourFinancial
PlannerWontTellYou.aspx (accessed 14 September 2008). Further reading Rattiner, J,H. (2005), Getting
Started as a Financial Planner, revised ed., Bloomberg Press, New York, NY.