Having a baby is no small feat. Fortunately, taking time off work for maternity leave can
give a new mother the chance to heal both physically and emotionally, as well as
sufficient time to bond with and care for her newborn baby.
Countless studies and research show that adequate paid maternity leave has a host of
benefits for mother, baby and the entire family, such as decreased rehospitalization
rates for both mother and baby, improved stress management and more consistent
exercise.
However, paid maternity leave is lacking in the U.S., which affects mothers, children
and families. Read on to learn more about maternity leave, including the landscape of
maternity leave in the U.S. and how maternity leave affects a person’s mental and
physical health after childbirth.
What Is Maternity Leave?
Maternity leave is the time a mother takes off from work after having a baby. It’s
generally a time for them to recover from childbirth and adjust to life with a newborn
baby. However, maternity leave in the U.S. isn’t standardized, which can make it
difficult to define.
“The definition and scope of maternity leave and the mechanics of taking leave vary
from organization to organization,” says Shayla Thurlow, vice president of people and
talent acquisition at The Muse who has developed and administered parental leave
programs for large and small organizations across various industries.
How Does Maternity Leave Work?
The U.S. is one of the few industrialized countries worldwide that doesn’t mandate paid
parental leave. Maternity leave is meant to be a time for a mother to give all her focus
and attention to her newborn baby, her health and her family, but the length of leave—
and whether it’s paid and to what extent—varies based on a number of factors, including
where you work, how long you’ve worked for your employer the number of employees
they have.
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) guarantees coverage for 12 workweeks of
unpaid leave per year for qualifying family and medical reasons, including the birth of a
baby, adoption or foster care placement, or when you or an immediate family member
are seriously ill and in need of care. However, FMLA doesn’t cover all employees.
Employers with at least 50 employees must allow parents 12 weeks of job-protected
leave to care for their newborn, but pay during this time is not guaranteed, according to
the International Labour Organization.
To qualify for FMLA coverage:
• You must work for a covered employer, including any public agency, any public
or private elementary or secondary school, or a private employer with at least 50
employees within a 75-mile radius.
• You must have worked at the company for at least 12 months.
• You must have worked at least 1,250 hours for the company in the 12 months
before your leave.
Many new mothers take less than 12 weeks of maternity leave for various reasons,
including (but not limited to) working for a company that doesn’t offer FMLA coverage
and/or being unable to afford being out of work for that long. A 2014 analysis in
Maternal and Child Health Journal found 41% of employed women in the U.S. received
paid maternity leave for an average of three weeks, with only a 31% wage replacement.
The research also noted that, on average, new mothers took 10 weeks of maternity leave,
and the majority of women didn’t receive any compensation for that time away from
work[1].
As Thurlow points out, some states require paid maternity leave, but it’s usually up to
the employer to decide whether to provide paid maternity leave for its employees.
“Though 12 weeks of unpaid leave is covered by federal law [in certain cases], many
families are not in a financial position to use that time [without pay] and may be unable
to have a long maternity leave,” she says.
Maternity Leave Trends in the U.S.
The U.S. is lacking when it comes to maternity leave benefits. Most adults don’t have
access to paid family leave through their employers, according to a 2021 survey
conducted by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Furthermore, a 2019 Pew Research
Center study of 41 nations found the U.S. is the only country that doesn’t mandate any
paid leave for new parents. Among the other 40 nations, the smallest amount of paid
maternity leave is two months in Ireland while Estonia offers more than a year and a
half of paid parental leave[2].
Worldwide, very few countries don’t guarantee paid maternity leave; instead, more than
120 countries offer paid maternity leave and health benefits by law. At the lower end of
the spectrum, only 33 countries mandate maternity leave that lasts less than 12 weeks.
Meanwhile, as of 2021 in the U.S., only nine states and the District of Columbia have
instituted some degree of paid parental leave.
How Can Maternity Leave Impact Your Health?
Taking maternity leave is essential not only for the health of the newborn, but also for
the health of the mother. “Maternity leave [or the 12 weeks after birth] is often referred
to as the fourth trimester,” says Suzanne Bovone, M.D., an OBGYN at Obstetrics and
Gynecology of San Jose, part of the Pediatrix Medical Group in Campbell, California.
“As each trimester of pregnancy brought changes for the woman and baby, the period
after delivery is a continuation of change. Inadequate maternity leave can lead not only
to anxiety and depression, but also relationship issues and the inability to return to
work.”
More than 12 weeks is needed for an adequate maternity leave, according to Dr. Bovone.
“Many issues that need assistance are not even apparent until three to four months after
delivery,” she says. “It almost becomes impossible to juggle the demands of self-care,
childcare, relationships and work obligations.”
According to Dr. Bovone, some complications of the side effects of the postpartum
period may include:
• Sleep deprivation
• Increased stress levels
• Loss of coping mechanisms
• Inability to think clearly and ask for help
• Negative thoughts and feelings
• Pelvic floor issues
• Impact on urinary and bowel function
• Negative impact on sexual health
“It may take months for one to recognize areas that need work,” she adds.
“Unfortunately, with limited maternity leave, many [parents] cannot find the time to
provide adequate self-care when they’re back at work.”
Physical Health
The body goes through major physical changes after having a baby, from pelvic floor
disruption to urinary and bowel dysfunction. “Just as pregnancy physically changes
one’s body over [more than] nine months, [recovery during] the postpartum period
takes just as long,” says Dr. Bovone. “Maternity leave is a time for the woman to rest and
recover.”
Research shows the positive effect maternity leave has on physical health. For instance,
a study in the American Economic Journal: Economic Policy observing health data on
mothers in Norway both before and after paid maternity leave became mandated by law
in 1977 found women who gave birth after 1977 experienced better overall health as they
approached middle age. This improvement was particularly noticeable among women
who worked low-income jobs and wouldn’t have taken unpaid leave previously—they
were less likely to smoke or experience high blood pressure, had lower BMIs and were
more likely to exercise regularly[3].
Paid maternity leave can also contribute to decreased infant mortality, as well as mother
and infant rehospitalizations, according to a 2020 review in the Harvard Review of
Psychiatry, which also found paid maternity leave to be associated with an increase in
pediatric visit attendance and timely administration of infant immunizations[4]. A 2018
study in Maternal and Child Health Journal found similar results: Women who took paid
maternity leave experienced a 47% decrease in the odds of rehospitalization for their
infants and a 51% decrease in the odds of being rehospitalized themselves at 21 months
postpartum[5].
The 2020 review in the Harvard Review of Psychiatry also found paid maternity leave can
lead to an increase in the initiation and duration of breastfeeding.
Paid maternity leave may lead to healthier habits as well. The 2018 study in Maternal
and Child Health Journalalso found women who took paid maternity leave were nearly
twice as likely to exercise and were able to better manage their stress levels compared to
those who didn’t take paid maternity leave.
Mental Health
Maternity leave has a significant impact on mental health as well. “There are huge
adjustments that come with a new baby,” says Thurlow. “Changes in family dynamics,
sleep deprivation and bonding with a new baby create mental and emotional strains for
new parents. The ability to take time off to adjust and create a new normal has proven
beneficial for parents’ overall mental and emotional well-being.”
Research shows a positive correlation between mental health and paid maternity leave
as well. According to the same 2020 review in the Harvard Review of Psychology, paid
maternity leave is associated with a decrease in postpartum maternal depression.
Meanwhile, a 2012 study in the Journal of Mental Health Policies and Economicsfound
having fewer than 12 weeks of maternity leave and fewer than eight weeks of paid
maternity leave to be associated with increases in depressive symptoms[6]. And the
longer the leave, the better: Longer paid maternity leaves are associated with decreased
depressive symptoms until six months postpartum, according to a 2014 study in
the Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law[7].
Maternity leave can also mean less stress for postpartum mothers, which can trickle
down in a positive way to affect family dynamics and relationships as well. A 2013 study
in the Journal of Family Issues observed Australian two-parent families and found the
length of maternity leave affected a mother’s mental health, quality of parenting and the
couple’s relationship. What’s more, mothers who took more than 13 weeks of paid leave
experienced significantly less psychological distress[8].
The positive effects of maternity leave aren’t just apparent immediately after a baby is
born: Maternity leave can lead to better mental health later in life as well. A 2015 study
in Social Science and Medicine using European data found longer maternity leaves to be
associated with improved mental health in old age[9].
Emotional Health
A mother’s emotional health can be influenced by maternity leave as well. Postpartum
emotional health involves identity changes that go along with becoming a parent, says
Dr. Bovone. “Our self-identity changes, as well as our relationships and interactions
with our partners, families and friends,” she adds.
New mothers may find it difficult to ask for help, and some may find being a parent isn’t
what they thought it would be. “Priorities may change as well, and some struggle with
this new perspective,” says Dr. Bovone.
Fortunately, maternity leave can lead to better bonding experiences between mother
and child. A 2018 study of 3,850 mothers in the U.S. found a significant correlation
between the duration of paid maternity leave and positive mother-child interactions,
such as secure attachment and empathy[10].
A decreased chance of domestic violence is also associated with paid parental leave. A
2019 study in Preventive Medicine found paid parental leave can be an effective strategy
to prevent future instances of intimate partner violence. This connection could exist
because paid leaves maintains household income and prevents financial stressors,
increases gender equity (which is associated with less intimate partner violence against
women) and gives parents time to bond with a child without having to worry about
work[11].
What Experts Say About Maternity Leave
Dr. Bovone and Thurlow both agree that adequate paid maternity leave is a necessity for
the health and well-being of mothers, children and families as a whole.
What’s more, maternity leave should be longer than what’s typically offered, according
to Dr. Bovone. “Ideally, a year to care for oneself and the newborn is needed,” she says.
“Coverage for breastfeeding issues, mental and emotional health, pelvic floor health and
sexual health should be the norm and accessible to all. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists supports the expansion of postpartum services, but the
current medical system at OBGYN offices doesn’t allow adequate time nor payment for
these services.” She stresses the importance of improved maternity leave, saying that not
only is it beneficial to mothers, but also to families, communities and, ultimately, work
environments.
Thurlow believes maternity leave should be a minimum of 12 weeks, paid and federally
mandated for all employers. “Maternity leave is good, but organizations should provide
paid parental leave to truly support parents,” she says.
She adds that maternity leave needs to be expanded. “Providing paid leave to a birthing
parent shouldn’t be a discussion, but the issue is much larger. Only providing paid leave
to a birthing parent doesn’t take into account families that are made whole by adoption,
surrogacy or the placement of a child. Additionally, only offering maternity leave places
a burden of childcare on one parent.”