Types of Foreign Aid 
Foreign assistance takes various forms. It may include the direct provision of commodities and equipment (e.g., food and generators); capacity-building technical assistance to partner governments or local beneficiaries; funding for transportation, water, or energy infrastructure; support to the general budget of foreign governments and international organizations; and direct lending or loan guarantees to partner governments, among others. For reporting purposes, agencies categorize all of these activities under five aid “types”: Projects, Administrative Costs, Core Contributions, Budget Support, Technical Assistance, and Other. Most U.S. foreign aid in recent years has been classified as projects, funded and managed through aid agencies (see Figure 1).


These categories may be misleading. Project-based aid includes certain types of assistance provided directly to partner governments for ongoing operations, or for purchasing commodities delivered directly to disaster-affected communities. U.S. foreign assistance agencies report aid type under a framework agreed and maintained by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD’s) Development Assistance Committee (DAC), a forum of leading bilateral donor countries.8 This reporting paradigm applies to all donors, and it does not account for the U.S. approach to foreign assistance delivery, leading to some apparently anomalous classifications. For instance, aid appropriated as “direct financial support” to the Government of Ukraine in 2022 was structured as a reimbursement for verified government expenditures—such as teachers’ salaries and social assistance payments—and managed by the World Bank. That funding has been classified as a project, including in the above figure, though the funding is meant to support Ukraine’s central budget. The aid type classifications used in reporting are important background to understand agencies’ relationships with an implementing partner, though the partner type is highly consequential for how aid will be implemented (see “Implementing Partner Types ”). While data reported in foreignassistance.gov may lack nuances necessary to understand the nature of each partnership, it still provides useful topline information about relative aid flows.


Projects 
Projects take many forms but generally involve a third-party implementing partner working under an agreement with the managing foreign aid agency (see “Managing, Funding, and Implementing Agencies” text box). Such projects generally have a high-level goal, several objectives to advance that goal, a series of quantitative targets for making progress toward that objective, and a welldefined “scope of work” for the implementing partner (see “Key Terms” text box). Usually, the project goal is aspirational and would require complementary developments outside the project itself to be achieved—such as effective leadership by the central government, receptivity to new practices by local populations, and a relatively stable implementing environment. In practice, projects are diverse. A project’s scope may involve delivery of medicine or food, building a highway, researching a new technology, or advising a government on customs procedures, among others. A nongovernmental organization (NGO) is the most common partner organization for USAID. Of the $181.5 billion in foreign assistance obligations for projects by USAID from FY2013 to 2022, 9 NGOs implemented $109.8 billion (60%). 10 Public international organizations (PIOs) are the second-largest category of project-based implementing partners. Project-based assistance is the predominant method of providing foreign assistance for several reasons. For one, this structure mitigates the risk of implementing partners diverting funding to objectives outside of U.S. priorities.12 Project-based aid expenditures are to be “allowable, allocable, and reasonable” under an agency-designed scope of work. 13 Detailed scopes of work allow audits of project costs and direct oversight of project activities, making reporting lines clearer. USAID typically initiates projects by developing a preliminary design and a research agenda to further scope the concept. 14 Agency staff develop these proposals and then submit them for approval.15 The resulting proposal (1) states a development problem (usually associated with objectives in a country strategy or a global initiative’s strategy), (2) hypothesizes how a project may solve it (a “theory of change”), and (3) proposes an approach to implementing that solution. If approved, USAID then issues a call for proposals from implementing partners, with the implementation approach as the “scope of work.” For instance, a USAID project may identify evidence that professionalizing a government’s revenue collection and budget development processes leads to improved government responsiveness to its constituents more generally, improving faith in government and stabilizing democratic institutions. USAID officials then may propose a fiscal management project intended to build capacity in a partner government’s tax and budget bureaus. 16 Such projects may comprise a single implementing partner award or several. A paradigmatic project contains a dedicated scope of work with established deliverables and performance targets, to be carried out by an implementing partner’s team over a defined time period (typically not to exceed five years). A project may include building infrastructure, technical assistance, supply of goods or services, or some combination of all three. Usually, projects are divided into several work streams, each called “components.” The fiscal management project, for example, may include (1) technical assistance to reform an agency’s administrative procedures, (2) training for bureau staff in modern accounting practices, (3) a quantitative analysis of current tax compliance rates, (4) a marketing campaign encouraging citizens to pay their taxes, and (5) sourcing of new accounting software for each bureau to track finances better. Projects often have “cross-cutting themes” as well, which may include addressing the needs of vulnerable populations and ensuring the views of local residents are taken into account, among others.


Budget Support and Core Contributions 
In contrast to project-based assistance, a U.S. foreign assistance agency may fund the general budget of a recipient organization. The Foreignassistance.gov database uses the label “budget support” for funding provided to a recipient government to support general operating costs rather than a specific scope of work. The label “core contribution” is used when such funding is provided to public international organizations (such as United Nations entities). Since at least 1995, most such assistance has been provided to public international organizations, with a smaller share going to foreign governments. Since 2022, the substantial budget support to Ukraine has reversed this balance, although that aid has been classified as a project. 17 USAID generally has issued budget support to foreign governments in a funding tranche after the government has met a predefined milestone.18 In providing budget support, USAID generally has relinquished exclusive control over spending, and funds instead have been managed according to the recipient’s own budgetary procedures and authorities.19 While USAID has less direct control over the recipient’s use of budget support aid, the agency does control whether it issues a funding tranche. For instance, USAID generally has provided budget support to Jordan (a top recipient of U.S. budget support aid) after the USAID/Jordan mission certifies annually that certain policy reforms have been met. For core contributions, the United States generally has not structured its funding in tranches. Rather, U.S. representatives have a direct role in the organization’s decisionmaking—often as a shareholder, member of the Board of Directors, or in appointing the organization’s leadership. For instance, the United States influences the World Bank’s decisionmaking as a major shareholder and nominates its president. 20


Budget Support: Loans and Loan Guarantees 
Historically, U.S. budget support to governments included a substantial lending element. From 1962 to 1988, loans represented 28% of total U.S. economic foreign assistance.21 Since 1988, Congress and the executive branch have shifted away from lending toward primarily grant-based assistance, viewing loans as contributing to already-burdensome debt levels among aid recipients.22 There has been some recent renewed interest in converting grant-based budget support to loans, with an FY2024 aid package to Ukraine requiring budget support through a loan rather than a grant.23 More frequently since the end of the Cold War, USAID has provided financing to governments through loan guarantees rather than direct loans. Loan guarantees are a commitment to repay all or part of a loan in the event a borrower stops payments. From 1993 to 2017, USAID issued 20 guarantees of sovereign bond issuances to Middle Eastern states and Ukraine, but only three remain active.24 The most recent such guarantees were issued in support of countries facing fiscal constraints due to political crises (the Arab Spring and the Russian incursion into Crimea and Eastern Ukraine). USAID has not issued any guarantees since 2017.25 Development financing to private entities, including loans and loan guarantees, remains an active area of U.S. support for international development. The U.S. International Development Finance Corporation administers most of those activities, typically by financing private sector projects rather than sovereign debt. 26 This financing generally has been based on market rates and, as a result, has not been accounted as foreign assistance.


Administrative Costs 
Administrative costs are funds used to deliver or implement aid that do not fit the definitions of project aid or budget support/core contributions.27 From FY2013 to FY2022, U.S. assistance agencies directed 7.7% of nonmilitary foreign assistance obligations toward administrative costs. The parameters of administrative costs are highly nuanced and differ from agency to agency: some agencies, for instance, classify monitoring and evaluation as an administrative cost, while others do not. Congressional directives from the 1970s have shaped what USAID classifies as administrative costs. Congress directed that the following two categories be funded by the “Operating Expenses” account: • All salaries and benefits of USAID direct hires, including Foreign Service and Civil Service, including when those employees are working to oversee a project activity. • All costs not directly related to a specific project. 28 USAID classifies all Operating Expenses as an administrative cost. Activities are considered operating expenses if they are inherently governmental or part of the cost of doing business. Examples include developing USAID policies and notices to Congress, drafting contract agreements for projects, and managing USAID accounting.29 Because all USAID salaries are considered administrative costs, work such as supporting project implementation and designing development interventions are considered administrative expenditures. By contrast, administrative work by USAID implementing partners is considered a project cost.
