Roux-en-Y gastric bypass involves creating a small gastric pouch, about the size of an egg, by stapling off the upper section of the stomach and then attaching it to a section of the intestines called the Roux limb.
 

 Simply put, this procedure both reshapes the stomach and reroutes the intestines by bypassing a large portion of the small intestine.
 

 This procedure promotes weight loss because it…
 

 Reduces the amount of food that your stomach can hold
 Limits the number of calories and nutrients that your body can absorb
 Changes your gut hormones affecting both appetite and intake
 

 Research also shows that the average weight loss associated with the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is about 70% excess weight, which is about 10% higher than the average weight loss associated with the gastric sleeve.
 

 The total amount of weight you lose depends on your type of surgery and the changes you make in your lifestyle habits.
 

 Medical benefits of gastric bypass surgery
 [box]
 Gastric bypass can help you to reduce your risk of obesity-related health problems including…
 

 Gastroesophageal reflux disease
 Heart disease
 High blood pressure
 High cholesterol
  Hyperlipidemia
 Relief of musculoskeletal pain
 Obstructive sleep apnea
 Type 2 diabetes
 Stroke
 Cancer
 Infertility
 

 

 So, you might be thinking that these medical benefits sound similar to those related to other bariatric surgeries… and you would be right. However, one noted difference in Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is related to the amount of time it takes to see results.
 

 Research published in the Texas Heart Institute Journal reveals that it is possible for the blood sugar of a diabetic patient to return to normal following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass before substantial weight loss takes place.
 

 It is estimated that approximately 40% of obese patients with type 2 diabetes go into remission within days or weeks after Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass.
 

 So, what about the financial benefits related to bariatric surgery? It’s possible that the high upfront cost of bariatric surgery can be intimidating, but research shows that it can be worth it in the long run (or actually a shorter run than you might think).
 

 One study published in the Obesity Reviews reveals that obesity alone, without any other related diseases or conditions, can cost an additional $1723 dollars a year. If you are thinking that isn’t a lot of money… Just wait until you factor in other conditions like diabetes.
 

 A study published by the Obesity Society estimated the yearly cost for managing diabetes is about $13,243 dollars. Now that’s a significant amount of money.
 

 Historically for bariatric surgery patients, the initial investment averaged about $29,000 for open surgeries in 2004-2007 and $19,000 for laparoscopic surgeries in 2004-2007.
 

 Results from a study published by Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases found that 1 year after bariatric surgery the improvement in the quality of life was similar between the Sleeve Gastrectomy and Gastric Bypass.
 

 However, this study found a greater increase in physical functioning after Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass.
 

 Short-term Complications of Gastric Bypass or abdominal surgery can include:
 Excessive bleeding
 Infection
 Adverse reactions to anesthesia
 Blood clots
 Perforation
 Stricture
 Lung or breathing problems
 Leaks in your gastrointestinal system
 Long-Term Complications of Gastric Bypass can include:
 Bowel obstruction
 Dumping syndrome
 Gallstones
 Hernias
 Low blood sugar
 Malnutrition/Nutrient Deficiencies
 Stomach perforation
 Ulcers
 Vomiting
 One study published by the NCBI found that anywhere from 3% to 20% of patients following Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass had Long-term complications that could require reoperation. Due to the nature of the surgery and how it impacts absorption of nutrients it is important to be aware of Nutrient Deficiencies that can occur.