2.3 VPNs and Extranets
 

  The term 'extranet' is commonly used to refer to a scenario whereby
  two or more companies have networked access to a limited amount of
  each other's corporate data. For example a manufacturing company
  might use an extranet for its suppliers to allow it to query
  databases for the pricing and availability of components, and then to
  order and track the status of outstanding orders. Another example is
  joint software development, for instance, company A allows one
  development group within company B to access its operating system
  source code, and company B allows one development group in company A
  to access its security software. Note that the access policies can
  get arbitrarily complex. For example company B may internally
  restrict access to its security software to groups in certain
  geographic locations to comply with export control laws, for example.
 

  A key feature of an extranet is thus the control of who can access
  what data, and this is essentially a policy decision. Policy
  decisions are typically enforced today at the interconnection points
  between different domains, for example between a private network and
  the Internet, or between a software test lab and the rest of the
  company network. The enforcement may be done via a firewall, router
  with access list functionality, application gateway, or any similar
  device capable of applying policy to transit traffic. Policy
  controls may be implemented within a corporate network, in addition
  to between corporate networks. Also the interconnections between
  networks could be a set of bilateral links, or could be a separate
  network, perhaps maintained by an industry consortium. This separate
  network could itself be a VPN or a physical network.
 

  Introducing VPNs into a network does not require any change to this
  model. Policy can be enforced between two VPNs, or between a VPN and
  the Internet, in exactly the same manner as is done today without
  VPNs. For example two VPNs could be interconnected, which each
  administration locally imposing its own policy controls, via a
  firewall, on all traffic that enters its VPN from the outside,
  whether from another VPN or from the Internet.
 

  This model of a VPN provides for a separation of policy from the
  underlying mode of packet transport used. For example, a router may
  direct voice traffic to ATM Virtual Channel Connections (VCCs) for
  guaranteed QoS, non-local internal company traffic to secure tunnels,
  and other traffic to a link to the Internet. In the past the secure
  tunnels may have been frame relay circuits, now they may also be
  secure IP tunnels or MPLS Label Switched Paths (LSPs)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Gleeson, et al. Informational [Page 9]
 

 RFC 2764  IP Based Virtual Private Networks  February 2000
 

 

  Other models of a VPN are also possible. For example there is a
  model whereby a set of application flows is mapped into a VPN. As
  the policy rules imposed by a network administrator can get quite
  complex, the number of distinct sets of application flows that are
  used in the policy rulebase, and hence the number of VPNs, can thus
  grow quite large, and there can be multiple overlapping VPNs.
  However there is little to be gained by introducing such new
  complexity into a network. Instead a VPN should be viewed as a
  direct analogue to a physical network, as this allows the leveraging
  of existing protocols and procedures, and the current expertise and
  skill sets of network administrators and customers.