December 24, the day Peterson said he was fishing, was gray, damp, and cold with a bit of wind. Few people were at the Berkeley Marina. When questioned by police, Peterson would not say what he was hoping to catch, but the fishing searches performed from his computer earlier in the month had included searches relating to sturgeon and striped bass. Angelo Cuanang, a published author on fishing in the San Francisco Bay who was accepted by the court as an expert fisherman, testified that Brooks Island was the wrong place to seek sturgeon, which congregated in a different part of the bay that time of year. Sturgeon also preferred live bait to lures, and Peterson’s rod was too weak to catch them. Anchoring was essential to reel in sturgeon; the homemade cement anchor in his boat would have been inadequate. Finally, it was illegal to troll for sturgeon, as Peterson claimed to have done. Peterson’s
lures and the time of year he was fishing were also wrong for catching striped bass. The prosecution’s theory was as follows: Peterson killed Laci sometime on the night of December 23 or morning of December 24. On the morning of the 24th, Peterson let their dog McKenzie out with his leash on to make it appear something had happened while Laci was walking him. He wrapped Laci’s body in a tarp in the bed of his truck, covered her with the patio umbrellas, drove to the warehouse, and then moved her body into his boat.  He drove to the Berkeley Marina, motored out to an area near Brooks Island, and slipped her body, attached to homemade concrete weights like the homemade anchor Peterson had made, into the bay.  Peterson then returned to Modesto, dropped off the boat at the warehouse, put the boat cover out back under a leaky gas blower so that any scent would be obscured, washed his clothes, and proceeded with the ruse that Laci was missing, hoping her body would never be discovered. The defense argued the police had not diligently pursued whether a person or persons other than Peterson were more likely responsible for Laci’s disappearance and murder. The defense presented evidence that a burglary had occurred on the Petersons’ street the week of her disappearance and argued that the police failed adequately to follow up on whether that burglary had any connection to Laci’s disappearance. It also presented evidence that a stranger had gone to several houses on December 23 asking for money and, one neighbor thought, casing houses for burglaries, and so might have had something to do with her disappearance. Testimony was presented thatthe same neighbor, walking with a police officer on Christmas Day to look for the stranger, had seen a pair of sandals lying in the road 150 feet from the Petersons’ home; the neighbor wondered at the time if they might have any connection to Laci’s disappearance, but the officer just left them there. To support the possibility of a third party’s involvement, the defense challenged the prosecution’s theory that Conner died December 23 or 24, presenting its own expert who testified based on ultrasounds and other evidence that Conner lived until after Christmas.The defense also sought to challenge other aspects of the prosecution’s case. To rebut the dog-trailing evidence, the defense called Ronald Seitz, a second dog handler who also had his dog try to find Laci’s scent at the Berkeley Marina on December 28. The dog, T.J., was given Laci’s slipper as a scent object, but discovered no scent trail. To rebut the inference that Peterson had a financial incentive to kill Laci, the defense presented a financial expert who testified that TradeCorp U.S.A. and the Petersons were both reasonably financially healthy. To portray the prosecution’s theory as physically impossible, the defense also sought to introduce video of a demonstration with a weighted 150-pound dummy in a boat on the bay in which a defense firm employee, trying to dump the dummy out, sank the boat. As will be discussed below, the trial court excluded the video. The defense offered explanations for the circumstances of Peterson’s behavior in April. His use of his mother’s name to purchase a car was at her suggestion, to avoid having it impounded. He had large amounts of cash because she gave it to him to reimburse him for money erroneously withdrawn from his bank account rather than hers. Finally, he had his brother’s driver’s license because the club where he was going to golf that day gave discounts for local residents such as his brother. The jury found Peterson guilty of murder in the first degree for killing Laci and murder in the second degree for killing Conner. (See Pen. Code, §§ 187, 189.) It found true the sole charged special circumstance, for multiple murder. Peterson had no criminal record nor any history of violent acts. At the penalty phase, the prosecution relied exclusively on the circumstances of the crime and victim impact evidence. Four members of Laci’s immediate family — her mother, Sharon; her stepfather, Ron Grantski; her brother, Brent; and her sister, Amy — testified. They described who Laci was as a person, shared photographs, memories, and vignettes from her life, and conveyed the grief and loss they each felt after the deaths of Laci and her unborn child. Through friends, family, neighbors, teachers, coworkers, employers, and other witnesses, the defense offered evidence that Peterson had been a kind and positive member of the community. Peterson grew up in a loving family, displayed a patient and gentle disposition, and was a solid student. As part of his high school community service requirement, Peterson worked at a home for the elderly and tutored homeless children. He started his own business and worked a variety of other jobs while in college. According to the defense, Peterson was always calm with Laci. Indeed, witnesses testified Peterson was calm at all times — at work, on the golf course, and in his dealings with all those around him. Friends and family testified to the impact the trial had had on Peterson’s relatives and indicated they believed, if sentenced to life in prison, Peterson could make a positive impact on the lives of others. In closing argument, defense counsel described Peterson’s life as one worth saving and argued that lingering doubt about Peterson’s guilt should also weigh in favor of a life verdict.