Issues Presented to the Ninth Circuit on Appeal
Attorneys for Montana unsuccessfully argued to the district court that the law represents a valid exercise
of Montana’s police power, that it does not violate any of the claimed constitutional provisions, that
federal law does not preempt the ban, and that the ban would have only an indirect, and thus permissible,
effect on interstate commerce. Montana then appealed the district court’s order granting the preliminary
injunction to the Ninth Circuit.
In its opening brief, Montana asserts that SB 419 has a “common sense consumer protection purpose” and
that the district court erred in concluding that TikTok and its users would win their constitutional
arguments. Montana also argues that the district court erred in its application of the remaining preliminary
injunction factors. A selection of Montana’s various arguments, ordered as they appear in the brief,
follows:
• Police Powers. Montana asserts that protecting consumers is an exercise of police power,
under which states have significant discretion.
• Data Access. Montana asserts that, based on news reports, the U.S. user data that TikTok
collects likely is available to the PRC at will, underscoring that the Montana legislature
enacted SB 419 to protect Montana consumers’ data privacy, not to impact the editorial
control of the platform.
• Burden Shifting. Montana asserts that the district court, in concluding that TikTok and
its users would prevail on their constitutional claims, erroneously shifted the evidentiary
burden for proving those claims to Montana.
The Ninth Circuit’s review of the district court’s order granting the preliminary injunction is limited.
Montana asks the court of appeals to hold that the district court abused its discretion by relying on “an
erroneous legal standard” or “clearly erroneous factual findings” (internal quotation marks omitted).
Montana emphasizes that a preliminary injunction is a “drastic remedy” that should not issue where a
plaintiff’s claim is “merely plausible” (internal quotation marks omitted). Virginia, together with 18 other
states, filed an amicus brief in support of Montana.
TikTok and its users each filed a response brief in late April 2024. They maintain that the district court
acted properly and emphasize various arguments, including those that follow (ordered as they appear in
the briefs):
• First Amendment. TikTok and its users argue that the preliminary injunction is justified
because SB 419 violates the First Amendment and the law does not withstand any level
of scrutiny that might be applied.
• Supremacy Clause (Preemption). TikTok and its users argue that SB 419 impermissibly
conflicts with the Defense Production Act and constitutes an improper incursion into
foreign affairs.
• Commerce Clause. TikTok and its users argue that SB 419 likely violates the Commerce
Clause by impeding the flow of interstate commerce.
These arguments largely reflect those made before the district court. Between Montana’s filing and the
response briefs, Congress passed PAFACAA. The response briefs include mention of this new law to
underscore arguments in favor of federal preemption. TikTok has also brought a pre-enforcement
challenge of the federal law in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. In the present matter, the
Ninth Circuit must weigh the various arguments to determine whether the district court properly
considered and applied the legal standards governing whether to grant a preliminary injunction before a
final determination on the merits of the claims could be made.