The anti-doping rules for the Paris Games apply to “all Athletes entered in or preparing for the Olympic
Games Paris 2024 or who have otherwise been made subject to the authority of the IOC in connection
with the Olympic Games.” Additionally, a number of rules apply to other individuals, including coaches,
trainers, and operations staff for the Games.
Athletes seeking to qualify for and participating in the 2024 Olympic Games were subject to testing under
IOC’s anti-doping policy beginning in April 2024 and will continue to be so through the close of the
Games. IOC’s anti-doping rules are “in accordance” with the World Anti-Doping Code, which includes
technical and procedural rules for the administration of anti-doping programs, the prohibited substances
list, and standards for testing laboratories, among other things. In addition to testing and related
requirements for athletes, other participants are barred from supporting doping, evasion of testing, and
manipulation of test results.
As signatories to the Code, IOC and IPC are each responsible for ensuring that their events are conducted
in compliance with WADA’s anti-doping requirements. A principal component of that obligation is the
collection of biological samples from athletes that can be tested for banned substances. While IPC
administers its own testing program, IOC has delegated this responsibility to ITA for the 2024 Games.
ITA is an independent organization created in 2018 by IOC and WADA to manage testing programs for
international sports federations and major events.
IOC’s anti-doping rules require athletes to submit to testing based on WADA’s International Standard for
Testing and Investigations, which allows the collection of both blood and urine samples to test for
prohibited substances. According to the organizers, the anti-doping program for the Paris Games will
include over 1,000 workers and an “anti-doping control space” at each venue where ITA and AFLD will
collect samples. Following collection, AFLD will test samples.
