Status Offenses
Status offenses comprise one category that may pose a particular issue with respect to the act 
requirement. As one legal scholar has explained, status offenses are crimes such as vagrancy, 
which are “often defined in such a way as to punish status (e.g., being a vagrant) rather than to 
punish specific action or omission to act.”205 On a number of occasions, examples of which 
follow, the Supreme Court has invalidated laws establishing status offenses. 
In its 1957 opinion in Lambert v. California,
206 the Court reversed a conviction under an 
ordinance that made it “unlawful for ‘any convicted person’ to be or remain in Los Angeles for a 
period of more than five days without registering” and required “any person having a place of 
abode outside the city to register if he comes into the city on five occasions or more during a 30-
day period.”207 The Court explained that the law criminalized “conduct that is wholly passive—
mere failure to register,” which it viewed as “unlike the commission of acts, or the failure to act 
under circumstances that should alert the doer to the consequences of his deed.”208 As a result, the
Court held that the ordinance violated the defendant’s due process right to notice.209 Following 
Lambert, however, a number of mandatory registration laws have survived constitutional 
challenges.210 For instance, in examining an indictment for a violation of the federal Sex Offender 
Registration and Notification Act (SORNA), the Ninth Circuit agreed with the government that 
“Lambert is inapplicable because convicted sex offenders are generally subject to registration 
requirements in all fifty states, and [the defendant] was aware that he was obligated to register as 
a sex offender.”
211
In a 1962 opinion in Robinson v. California,
212 the Court reversed a conviction under a state law 
that criminalized addiction to narcotics without requiring any additional act by the defendant. 
According to the Court, the statute was distinguishable from “one which punishes a person for the 
use of narcotics, for their purchase, sale or possession, or for antisocial or disorderly behavior 
resulting from their administration,” since it instead made “the ‘status’ of narcotic addiction a 
criminal offense, for which the offender may be prosecuted ‘at any time before he reforms.’”
213
The Court held that the law, “which imprisons a person . . . afflicted [by narcotics addiction] as a 
criminal, even though he has never touched any narcotic drug within the State or been guilty of 
any irregular behavior there, inflicts a cruel and unusual punishment” in violation of the Eighth 
Amendment, as incorporated against the states through the Fourteenth Amendment.214
Status offenses can often be “reformulated and redrafted to conform to basic principles of 
criminal justice.”215 For instance, if a “statute that penalizes being an alcoholic or drug addict is 
impermissible,” a “statute that penalizes appearing in public in an intoxicated state” may be
permissible.
216 The Supreme Court’s 1968 opinion in Powell v. Texas217 illustrates this distinction. 
Powell stemmed from the conviction of a defendant under a state law making it a crime to “get 
drunk or be found in a state of intoxication in any public place, or at any private house except [a 
person’s] own.”218 The defendant argued that he had a compulsion to drink and that the law 
amounted to cruel and unusual punishment pursuant to Robinson.
219 A four-Justice plurality of the 
Court disagreed and explained that the defendant was convicted “not for being a chronic 
alcoholic, but for being in public while drunk on a particular occasion.”220 In other words, the 
plurality concluded that the law did not seek “to punish a mere status” as the law at issue in 
Robinson did, but instead punished a voluntary act, being in public while intoxicated.221 In a 
concurring opinion, Justice White said that the result would have been different if the public 
intoxication were an unavoidable result of chronic alcoholism.222 For example, according to 
Justice White, the Eighth Amendment would prohibit criminalizing public intoxication for 
chronic alcoholics who are homeless because “they have no place else to go and no place else to 
be when they are drinking.”
223 Four dissenting Justices would have agreed with that conclusion.224
The primary point of departure between Justice White and the dissenting Justices was over the 
record in Powell—Justice White agreed with the ultimate result in Powell because “nothing in the 
record indicates that [the defendant] could not have done his drinking in private or that he was so 
inebriated at the time that he had lost control of his movements and wandered into the public 
street.”225 The dissenting Justices concluded, however, that the “appellant is a ‘chronic alcoholic’ 
who, according to the trier of fact, cannot resist the ‘constant excessive consumption of alcohol’ 
and does not appear in public by his own volition but under a compulsion’ which is part of his 
condition.”
226Another example of the distinction between an impermissible status offense and a
seemingly permissible conduct-based offense may be found in 8 U.S.C. § 1326, which in relevant 
part provides that “any alien who (1) has been arrested and deported or excluded and deported, 
and thereafter (2) enters, attempts to enter, or is at any time found in, the United States . . .
[without the consent of the Attorney General] shall be fined . . . or imprisoned . . . or both.”227
Some federal appellate courts have rejected the argument that “the ‘found in’ provision of § 1326 
impermissibly punishes aliens for their ‘status’ of being found in the United States.”228 In United 
States v. Ayala, the Ninth Circuit distinguished § 1326 from the law at issue in Robinson, 
explaining that “[a] conviction under § 1326 for being ‘found in’ the United States necessarily 
requires that a defendant commit an act: he must re-enter the United States without permission 
within five years after being deported.”229
Federal appellate courts had split on the issue of whether the Robinson and Powell distinction 
between impermissible status offenses and permissible conduct-based offenses allowed 
“criminalizing conduct that is an unavoidable consequence of one’s status.”230 In the 2024 
opinion City of Grants Pass v. Johnson, the Supreme Court examined this issue in the context of a 
municipal ordinance criminalizing sleeping or camping in public.231 In a divided opinion, the 
Ninth Circuit concluded that the ordinance constituted cruel and unusual punishment, citing to 
Powell’s concurrence and dissent for the proposition that “a person cannot be prosecuted for 
involuntary conduct if it is an unavoidable consequence of one’s status.”
232 The Ninth Circuit 
observed that this would be the inevitable outcome for some of the involuntary homeless 
population in Grants Pass, which exceeded the available shelter space in the jurisdiction.233
The Supreme Court disagreed, concluding that the camping ordinance was not a status offense of 
the type barred in Robinson (which lacked a mental state or act requirement), because the 
ordinance in Grants Pass required “actions like ‘occupy[ing] a campsite’ on public property ‘for 
the purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live.’”
234 The Court likened the facts of Grants 
Pass to those of Powell and relied on the Powell plurality’s distinction between laws 
criminalizing status and those criminalizing acts, even if on some level those acts may be an 
involuntary result of the underlying status.235 Although the Court did not reconsider Robinson, it 
reiterated that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause of the Eighth Amendment focuses on 
the method or kind of punishment a government may impose, rather than on the question of what 
a government may criminalize.
236 Additional analysis of Grants Pass and its broader implications 
for status offenses and homelessness laws may be found in other CRS products.23