Before beginning the installation, thoroughly & completely read these instructions. Please refer to
the Parts List to insure that all parts & hardware are received prior to the disassembly of the vehicle.
If any parts are found to be missing, contact SKYJACKER® Customer Service at 318-388-0816 to
obtain the needed items. If you have any questions or reservations about installing this product,
contact SKYJACKER® Technical Assistance at 318-388-0816. 
Installation:
1. Park the vehicle on a flat, level surface & block the front & rear tires.
2. Place the transmission in neutral.
3. Loosen all of the engine mount bolts about ½ turn.
4. Support the transfer case cross member with a transmission or floor
jack. Remove the bolts & nuts for each side of the cross member.
5. Slowly lower the cross member, approximately 2", to allow enough room to install the new
Skyjacker tubular spacers.
1994-2001 Jeep Cherokee XJ
Install the new Skyjacker transfer case linkage pivot
 drop bracket to the stock pivot bracket using the OEM
 hardware. Using the two 1/4" x 1" bolts with a flat
 washer & self locking nut, bolt the ball swivel bracket
 (See Arrow in Photo # 3) to the new Skyjacker drop
 bracket. Note: The bracket has two sets of holes. The
 bottom holes are for a 4" lift as shown & the upper
 holes are for a 2 1/2" lift.
 2. Placing the pivot bracket back in location, start the end
 of the rod through the ball swivel & bolt the bracket in
 location with the OEM hardware. (See Photo # 4)
 3. Check to make sure that the transfer case will fully engage at
 each end of the shifter travel. If linkage adjustment is required,
 4. Check the transfer case shifter to see if it will move to 4L. If
 not, the linkage will need adjusting as follows. Place the shifter
 in 4L, loosen the adjustment bolt  &
 push the linkage ("B" Arrow in Photo # 5) forward until it stops.
 Now retighten adjustment bolt. Check to be sure the 4WD
 works properly.
 5. On 5 speed models, engage the clutch & check the
 transmission shifter to see if it will go into 2nd gear. If not, the
 shifter housing on the floor will need trimming. Remove the
 center console, pull back the carpet, remove the screws
 holding the shifter boot to the floor, & trim or grind the floor
 board until sufficient clearance is obtained.
 Shift through each gear to check clearance at this
 time. Now reinstall the shifter boot, carpet, & console.
