WHILE the occipital and sincipital cerebral hernias form external 
visible tumors in the occipital and naso-frontal regions respectively, we 
find no external visible tumors in the basal hernias. As the sincipital 
hernias, however, leave the cranium in close proximity to the place of 
exit of the basal hernias, let us first review briefly the various forms of 
sincipital hernias: 


1. The naso-frontal hernias leave the cranium between the frontal and 
nasal bones and form a tumor in the median line in the region of the 
glabella. 


2. The naso-ethmoidal hernias leave the cranium between the frontal 
and nasal bones on the one side and the lateral mass or labyrinth on the 
other, which is forced or displaced downward toward the nasal cavity. 
The tumor appears externally in the region of the border between the 
osseous and cartilaginous portions of the nose, hanging down toward the 
tip or the wing of the nose. 


3. The naso-orbital hernias leave the cranium between the frontal, 
ethmoid and lachrymal bones. In the region of the latter they enter 
the orbit and present at or near the inner canthus of the eye. 


All the above-named varieties present external visible tumors. The 
naso-ethmoidal and naso-orbital varieties are probably not distinguish- 
able from each other, as they leave the cranium at the same place ; 
namely, the nasal notch of the frontal and the cribriform plate of the 




ethmoid bone. Furthermore, the same hernia may divide into two 
branches, of which the anterior passes downward and forward behind 
the nasal bone, to protrude in the face at the border of the osseous and 
cartilaginous part of the nose, and the posterior branch descends into 
the anterior and medial portion of the orbit between the frontal, eth- 
moid and lachrymal bones. There is always some defect of the bones 
in question at the point where the encephalocele leaves the cranium. 


4. Basal hernias are, as already stated, distinguished from the other 
sincipital hernias by not causing a protruding tumor in the face. 
Heinecke* distinguishes between three forms of these hernias : 


I. Cephalocele spheno-pharyngea is the most common variety, and 
leaves the cranium through an opening between the body of the sphenoid 
bone and the ethmoid bone, or through one of these bones, to come down 
in the nasal or naso-pharyngeal cavity. Extending from this point they 
may present in one of the nostrils, as in Czerny’s case; in the naso- 
pharyngeal cavity as in the cases of Giraldés, Otto, and Klimentowsky, 
cited from Larger,” and in my case, or come down into the mouth 
through a cleft palate, as in the cases reported by Virchow, Lichten- 
berg, Klintosch and Serres, also cited from Larger. 


II. Cephalocele spheno-orbitalis, which leaves the cranium through 
the superior orbital fissure to enter the orbit behind the globe of the eye. 


III. Cephalocele spheno-maxillaris, which, like the second form, leaves 
the cranium through the superior orbital fissure, but instead of remain- 
ing in the posterior part of the orbit, descends through the inferior 
orbital fissure into the spheno-maxillary fossa. The tumor presents, and 
can be felt in the mouth on the medial side of the ascending ramus 
of the inferior maxilla, and is visible on the outside of the face, on the 
cheek below the zygoma, in the same place where the retro-maxillary 
branches of retro-nasal fibroids present. 


The two last-named hernias are exceedingly rare, and I have been 
unable to find all the varieties to which Heinecke’s classification refers. 
Larger mentions three instances of retro-orbital encephalocele referred 
to by Spring. In the case published by Walther, the tumor descended 
through the superior orbital fissure, and caused exophthalmos and 
destruction of the eye. Spring had seen two similar specimens in the 
museum at Bonn. 


The first variety, the spheno-pharyngeal, is less uncommon. I shall 
mention the more accurately described instances of this variety, as they 
present more of surgical interest than Heinecke ascribed to them when 
he said : “Cephalocele basalis is of no surgical importance, as it has been 
found only in non-viable monsters (nicht lebensfahigen Missbildungen).” 


Attempts at the removal of encephalocele by operation have been 
made by Lichtenberg, Czerny and myself. Lichtenberg’s patient died 
from the operation; Czerny’s patient survived the operation, but died 






later from apparently independent causes; my patient made a definite 
recovery. 


Lichtenberg” reports the case of a newborn girl in whom a large 
reddish tumor, the size of a small fist, hung out of the mouth, covering 
the chin, with its base resting on the sternum. On more minute examin- 
ation it was seen that the patient had a hare-lip situated nearly in the 
median line of the lip, and complicated with cleft palate. The tumor 
was divided into two portions by a slight constriction in the middle, was 
elastic to the touch, and was attached by a pedicle which could be 
followed up to the right wall of the nasal cavity by opening the mouth, 
where it was continuous with the nasal mucosa. The patient died from 
the operation, and the autopsy demonstrated that the tumor was a cere- 
bral hernia. 


Klintosch” gives a vague description of an infant in whom a 
tumor protruded in the mouth. The patient had a hare-lip and cleft 
palate, some bones of the face were wanting, and the eyes were atrophied. 
In the sella Turcica was an opening the size of a goose-quill through 
which the neck of the hernia came down into the mouth, there to form 
a tumor the size of a hazelnut. This contained the hypophysis, which 
was hollow and communicated directly with the ventricle. 


Serres” describes an infant in whom some portions of the brain, with 
their envelopes, protruded from the cranium in the median line between 
- the sphenoid and ethmoid bones. The tumor descended into the nasal 
fossa, almost into the pharynx. 


Giraldés,’ according to Dupuytren,’ observed an encephalocele which 
descended into the interior of the nose. 


Otto,”* cited by Spring, states that he has seen in the museum at 
Vienna a cerebral tumor which had penetrated into the nasal cavity 
through the cribriform plate of the ethmoid. 


Kelsch,’ according to Otto, has seen a case in which the hypophysis 
was situated in the sphenoidal sinus. 


Klimentowsky,’ describes an encephalocele in a newborn child, in 
which the anterior portion of the two frontal lobes descended into the 
right side of the nasal cavity, as was verified by the autopsy. 


Rippmann," cited by Meyer, found in a foetus of twenty-three weeks, 
the head of which was double the normal size, and consequently hydro- 
cephalic, a lobulated tumor having a pedicle three or four lines in thick- 
ness, which descended through a canal in the body of the sphenoid bone. 


Virchow ™ describes a specimen in the Berlin museum, of hydrencepha- 
locele palatina in a newborn child. (See Fig. 1.) From the open mouth 
protruded an irregular nodulated tumor the size of a small apple. It 
was apparently adherent to the hard palate, but upon section it was seen 
that it had pushed both the vomer and the hard palate forward and up- 
ward, and that it emerged from the cranial cavity through a broad open- 
ing immediately anterior to the sphenoid bone, and behind the still carti- 
laginous ethmoid. The anterior portion of the sphenoid was forced 
downward and backward, and the connection between it and the vomer 
interrupted by the tumor, so that the vomer was connected only with 


the ethmoid. The anterior portion of the sac contained a cavity lined 
with smooth dura mater, below and behind which were several irregular 
smaller cavities. In the upper portion of the tumor was brain substance 
which extended from this point up into the cerebral portion of the cranial 
cavity. The brain was pushed downward toward the base of the cranial 
cavity, and above it was a large cavity filled with fluid, and surrounded 
by a thick membrane. 


In addition to this more or less cursory discussion of cases from the 
older literature, there has now appeared an accurate and excellent report 
of a case by Meyer,” from Czerny’s clinic. The case was one of con- 
genital nasal polypus, and was brought to the Heidelberg clinic for 
operation. The child died six weeks later, and the diagnosis was made 
after post-mortem microscopical examination. 




The patient was a child three days old, well developed, weighing five 
or six pounds. The left ala nasi was broadened and pushed upward by 
a soft, elastic, compressible, pedunculated, transparent tumor the size of 
a hazelnut, half of which protruded through the opening of the nose, 
and was clad with smooth, yellowish-red mucous membrane, and covered 
with dried crusts of serous exudate. The tumor did not increase in size 
when the child cried; it was attached 14 cm. behind the free border of 
the septum. Upon incision of the tumor bloody serum escaped, and 
upon pressure puriform mucus was forced out. 
