A broad range of drugs are under investigation, but there are currently no drugs approved by
regulatory agencies for the treatment of NAFLD. This is a field of very active research. As an increasing
number of clinical studies are running and results are reported, recommendations may rapidly change.
Information on which clinical trials are ongoing can be found on www.clinicaltrials.gov and you should
ask your physician for newest updates. Some drugs that are used to treat other conditions have also been
tested for NASH. Based on their effects demonstrated by liver biopsy, the following drugs seem to have
some efficacy.
– Vitamin E showed promise, but only in patients without cirrhosis and without T2D. Given long-term and
at high doses, however, vitamin E potentially had negative effects and some data indicate that it could
increase the risk of early death and certain cancers.
– Pioglitazone, which is approved for the treatment of diabetes, showed promise for NASH in patients with
diabetes and pre-diabetes. Side effects such as weight gain and bone fractures should be considered.
– Liraglutide and semaglutide are approved for the treatment of obesity and for diabetes. They have also
shown promise in reducing liver fat and inflammation in NASH and will be evaluated further.
Important: all these drugs must be discussed with your doctor and can harm when self-administered.
Future available drugs will be an add-on therapy because lifestyle changes are essential as NAFLD is
mainly a lifestyle-related disease.
Bariatric surgery very effectively achieves weight loss and weight loss maintenance in patients
with obesity. The agreed criteria for the surgical management of obesity and metabolic disorders (BMI
≥40kg/m2
 or BMI ≥35kg/m2
 with complicating disorders, no resolution after medical treatment) are
also applicable for NAFLD. Patients with a BMI of 30–35 kg/m2
 who also have T2D that is not adequately
controlled by medical therapy may also be candidates for surgery.
It is important to know that the change in the anatomy by bariatric surgery can lead to the need of lifelong
follow up and this should be considered in discussing this option for patients.
If you wonder whether vitamin E, the above-mentioned drugs or bariatric surgery could be helpful for you,
please consult your doctor and discuss the potential risks and benefits. Any treatment decision should be
based on your individual situation and medical history