LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER POLICY SUMMARY. This policy is provided by Legal & General Assurance Society Limited. OVERVIEW. These policies are designed for people who want to help protect against the impact of death or terminal illness or critical illness. The policy could be used to help pay your outstanding mortgage or to help protect your family’s lifestyle and everyday living expenses. This Policy Summary is only a brief guide to the cover and exclusions. You will find full details in the Policy Booklet which will form the basis of our contract with you. WHAT IS COVERED? Life insurance You will be covered if before the end of the policy: • you die. • you are diagnosed as being terminally ill, and in the opinion of your hospital consultant and our medical officer, the illness is expected to lead to death within 12 months. We’ll pay out your amount of cover once. After this happens, the policy will end and you’ll no longer have any cover. Critical illness cover If you choose to add critical illness cover alongside your life insurance as a separate policy, (also referred to as additional or independent critical illness cover) you will be covered if before the end of the policy: • You are diagnosed with or undergo a medical procedure for one of the critical illnesses we cover and you survive for 14 days from diagnosis. We’ll pay out your amount of cover in full once. After this happens, the policy will end and you’ll no longer have any cover. T 2 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER XWHAT IS NOT COVERED? You are not covered if you don’t give us full and honest answers to the questions we ask you before the policy starts. Please don’t assume that we’ll contact your doctor to find out your full medical details. Life insurance We won’t pay out: • If within the first year of the policy, your death is caused by suicide or, intentional and serious self-injury or an event where, in our reasonable opinion, you took your own life. • If some elements of cover are restricted based on the information you give us. If we do this we’ll tell you what we’ve excluded in your policy booklet under ‘What you are not covered for’. • The amount of cover more than once if a joint life policy is chosen. This may be when the first person dies or has a valid claim. We have a replacement cover option which could allow the other person covered to take out a new single life policy, ensuring they still have some protection in place. • If you are diagnosed with a terminal illness which doesn’t meet our definition. Terminal Illness cover can’t be claimed: • after your death • or if the length of the policy is less than two years. Critical illness cover We won’t pay out: • If you are diagnosed with or undergo a medical procedure for one of the critical illnesses we cover which doesn’t meet our definition. • If death occurs within 14 days of diagnosis of one of the critical illnesses we cover. • If you die. • If some elements of cover are restricted based on the information you give us. If we do this we’ll tell you what we’ve excluded in your policy booklet under ‘What you are not covered for’. • The amount of cover more than once if a joint life policy is chosen. This will be when the first person has a valid claim. We have a replacement cover option which could allow the other person covered to take out a new single life policy, ensuring they still have some protection in place. For all policies • Life cover policies have no cash value and we will not pay out if you reach the end of the policy without making a valid claim. • If you stop paying your premiums your cover will end 60 days after the first missed premium. 3 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER ABOUT THE POLICY. YOUR PREMIUMS Your premiums will remain the same during the length of the policy unless you make any changes. AGE LIMITS Product Maximum age for buying a policy Minimum length of the policy Maximum length of the policy Your policy must end before age Life Insurance* 77 1 year 50 years 90 Decreasing Life Insurance* 74 5 years 50 years 90 Critical Illness Cover* 67 2 years 50 years 75 The minimum age to take out a policy is 18. The policy must not end before your 29th birthday. *Guaranteed premiums 4 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER YOUR COVER Level cover If you choose level cover, your amount of cover will stay the same unless you change it. If the policy is to help repay a mortgage, you need to ensure that your amount of cover matches your outstanding mortgage. The policy may not completely pay off your outstanding mortgage, if you change the mortgage you have in any way and you don’t adjust your cover to match your new arrangements. Decreasing cover If you choose decreasing cover it is often used to help protect a repayment mortgage. Therefore the amount of cover reduces roughly in line with the way a repayment mortgage decreases. You need to ensure that your amount of cover matches your outstanding mortgage. The policy may not completely pay off your outstanding mortgage, if: • you change the mortgage you have in any way and you don’t adjust your cover to match your new arrangements. • the interest rate on your mortgage becomes higher than the rate applied to the policy. The rate will be shown in your Personal Quote or the Policy Booklet. 5 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER BENEFITS FOR LIFE INSURANCE. The following benefit(s) may have eligibility criteria and restrictions that apply. ACCIDENTAL DEATH BENEFIT Included at no extra cost. WHAT IS COVERED? We’ll cover you from when we receive your application, for up to 90 days or until we accept, postpone or decline your application. This means that if you die due to an accident during this time, we’ll pay out the amount you’ve asked to be insured for, up to a maximum of £300,000 for all applications. The benefit will be paid out if the person covered, or one of the persons covered, sustains a bodily injury caused by accidental, violent, external and visible means, which solely and independently of any other cause results in death within 90 days of the accident. WHAT IS NOT COVERED? We won’t pay out if death occurs from: • Suicide, intentional and serious self-injury or an event where, in our reasonable opinion, you took your own life. • Taking part or attempting to take part in a dangerous sport or pastime. • Taking part or attempting to take part in any aerial flight other than as a fare paying passenger on a licensed airline. • Committing, attempting or provoking an assault or criminal offence. • War (whether declared or not), riot or civil commotion. • Taking alcohol or drugs (unless these drugs were prescribed by a registered doctor in the United Kingdom). • Accidents that happened before you applied. We don’t provide this benefit: • If we have been told that the application is to replace an existing policy with us while cover is still provided under the existing policy. • From the date you tell us that you no longer want the application to proceed. Your lump sum will be paid only once either under the Accidental Death Benefit, Free Life Cover or the policy itself. T X 6 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER FREE LIFE COVER Included at no extra cost if you are moving home. WHAT IS COVERED? We’ll cover you if you die between exchange of contracts and completion of your property purchase up to a maximum of 90 days, provided you are accepted on standard terms and we have everything we need to start your policy. Your Free Life Cover will end as soon as the policy starts. You’ll be covered for the lower of your proposed amount of cover or the amount of your mortgage, up to a maximum of £300,000. If you live in Scotland, you’ll be covered between completion of missives and your date of entry. WHAT IS NOT COVERED? You won’t be accepted for Free Life Cover if you are 55 years old or over. For joint life policies you both need to be under this age for Free Life Cover to apply. We won’t provide cover if you have another policy with any provider covering the same mortgage. Your amount of cover will be paid only once either under Free Life Cover, Accidental Death Benefit or the policy itself. T X 7 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER CRITICAL ILLNESSES COVERED. If you choose Critical Illness Cover, you will be covered for the illnesses shown below. For a claim to pay out, your illness must meet Legal & General’s definition. It must also be verified by a consultant at a hospital in the UK, who is a specialist in an area of medicine appropriate to the cause of your claim as in some instances cover may be limited. For example: • some types of cancer are not covered • to make a claim for some illnesses, you need to have permanent symptoms. Please check the full definitions found in the Guide to Critical Illness Cover and Policy Booklet to make sure that you understand exactly what is covered. • Aorta graft surgery - requiring surgical replacement. • Aplastic anaemia - with permanent bone marrow failure. • Bacterial meningitis - resulting in permanent symptoms • Benign brain tumour - resulting in either surgical removal or permanent symptoms. • Blindness - permanent and irreversible. • Cancer - excluding less advanced cases. • Cardiac arrest - with insertion of a defibrillator. • Cardiomyopathy - of specified severity. • Coma - with associated permanent symptoms. • Coronary artery by-pass grafts – with surgery to divide the breastbone or thoracotomy. • Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) – resulting in permanent symptoms. • Deafness - permanent and irreversible. • Dementia including Alzheimer’s disease - of specified severity. • Encephalitis - resulting in permanent symptoms. • Heart attack - of specified severity. • Heart valve replacement or repair - with surgery. • Kidney failure - requiring permanent dialysis. • Liver failure - of advanced stage. • Loss of hand or foot – permanent physical severance. • Loss of speech - total permanent and irreversible. • Major organ transplant – from another donor. • Motor neurone disease - resulting in permanent symptoms. • Multiple sclerosis - where there have been symptoms. • Multiple system atrophy – resulting in permanent symptoms. 8 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER • Open heart surgery – with median sternotomy. • Paralysis of limb – total and irreversible. • Parkinson’s disease - resulting in permanent symptoms. • Primary pulmonary hypertension - of specified severity. • Progressive supranuclear palsy – resulting in permanent symptoms. • Removal of an eyeball – due to injury or disease. • Respiratory failure - of advanced stage. • Spinal stroke - resulting in symptoms lasting at least 24 hours. • Stroke - resulting in symptoms lasting at least 24 hours. • Systemic lupus erythematosus - with severe complications. • Third degree burns - covering 20% of the surface area of the body or 20% of the face or head. • Traumatic brain injury – resulting in permanent symptoms. • Total and Permanent Disability – of specified severity. We’ll cover you for the loss of physical or mental ability, due to an illness or injury, to do either your own occupation or at least three of the six Specified Work Tasks (see section headed Specified Work Tasks). The definition that applies to you will be shown in the Policy Booklet and will depend on your occupation, employment status and whether you are paid for your work. Total and Permanent Disability will end when the oldest person covered reaches the policy end date, or 70th birthday, whichever is earlier. SPECIFIED WORK TASKS Walking – The ability to walk more than 200 metres on a level surface. Climbing – The ability to climb up a flight of 12 stairs and down again, using the handrail if needed. Lifting – The ability to pick up an object weighing 2kg at table height and hold for 60 seconds before replacing the object on the table. Bending – The ability to bend or kneel to touch the floor and straighten up again. Getting in and out of a car – The ability to get into a standard saloon car, and out again. Writing – The manual dexterity to write legibly using a pen or pencil, or type using a desktop personal computer keyboard. 9 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER ADDITIONAL COVER IF CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER IS CHOSEN. • Carcinoma in situ of the breast - treated by surgery. • Low grade prostate cancer - requiring treatment. WHAT IS COVERED? Unless specifically excluded in the Policy Booklet under the heading ‘What you are not covered for’: We’ll pay out 25% of your amount of cover up to a maximum of £25,000. Your amount of cover and premiums will not be affected if we make an additional payment to you and we’ll still pay out the amount you are covered for under the main policy in case of a terminal illness or critical illness or death. We’ll only pay out once for each definition shown above. If joint life cover is chosen both lives insured will be able to claim. WHAT IS NOT COVERED? Please check the full definitions found in the Guide to Critical Illness Cover and Policy Booklet to make sure you understand exactly what is not covered. T X 10 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER EXTRA BENEFITS INCLUDED IF CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER IS CHOSEN. ACCIDENT HOSPITALISATION BENEFIT WHAT IS COVERED? We’ll pay £5,000 if you are in hospital with physical injuries for a minimum of 28 consecutive days, immediately following an accident. WHAT IS NOT COVERED? This benefit will not be payable if a valid claim has been made for Critical Illness Cover. We’ll only pay one claim for each person covered T X 11 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER CHILDREN'S CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER WHAT IS COVERED? We’ll cover a relevant child* or any children you have in the future if, before the end of your policy, they’re diagnosed with one of the critical illnesses we cover, including Additional Cover (except for Total and Permanent Disability). They are covered from when they’re 30 days old to their 18th birthday (or 21st birthday if they’re in full time education). We’ll pay out 50% of your original amount of cover up to a maximum of £25,000 for a valid claim. Your amount of cover and premiums will not be affected if we make an additional payment to you. We’ll pay out one claim per relevant child* under the policy. Once two claims in total have been made, children’s cover will end. If the same relevant child* is covered by more than one policy issued by us, we’ll pay out a maximum of £50,000 for that relevant child*. WHAT IS NOT COVERED? Your children will not be covered: • For Total and Permanent Disability. • For Terminal Illness Cover. • For any condition that was present at birth. • Where the symptoms arose before the relevant child* was covered. • If death occurs within 14 days of diagnosis of one of the critical illnesses we cover. T X 12 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER ADDITIONAL BENEFITS INCLUDED FOR CHILDREN'S CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER Your amount of cover and premiums will not be affected if we make an additional benefit payment to you. For further details, please read your Policy Booklet. Child Accident Hospitalisation Benefit - pays £5,000 if a relevant child* is admitted to hospital with physical injuries for a minimum of 28 consecutive days immediately following an accident. Child Funeral Benefit - contributes £4,000 towards the funeral of a relevant child*. Childcare Benefit - if we have paid a claim for a critical illness under this policy, and you have a natural child, legally adopted child or stepchild under 5 years old, we’ll pay up to £1,000 towards childcare with a registered childminder. Family Accommodation Benefit - pays £100 for every night a relevant child* spends in hospital, in the three months immediately following diagnosis of one of the critical illnesses covered (up to a maximum of £1,000). *Relevant child - a natural child, legally adopted child or stepchild of the person covered, who is at least 30 days old and younger than 18 (21 years old if in full-time education). 13 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER FURTHER INFORMATION. CAN I INCREASE MY COVER? You can apply to increase your cover at anytime. Usually, changes to your amount of cover will be assessed at the time. However, if the ‘Changing your policy’ section is shown in your Policy Booklet then you can increase your cover, for certain life events, without the need to provide us with further medical information. Please see your Policy Booklet for further information. Eligibility criteria apply. CAN I MAKE CHANGES? You can make changes to the policy. Please talk to us and we’ll consider your request and let you know if what you’re asking for is possible and what your new premium will be. If you make any changes to the policy then a new policy may be set up and different terms and conditions could apply. WHAT HAPPENS IF I MOVE ABROAD? If you move abroad during the length of the policy, please check the Policy Booklet, as your policy may be affected. ARE PAY OUTS TAXED? For life insurance Any pay outs we make should be free from UK Income Tax and Capital Gains Tax. The Government may change this tax position at any time. If the policy is written under a suitable trust, the amount of cover payable on death should not form part of the estate for Inheritance Tax purposes. If the policy is not written in trust, the amount of cover payable will normally go into the estate and Inheritance Tax may apply. For critical illness cover Any pay outs that we make should be free from UK Income Tax and Capital Gains Tax. The Government may change this tax position at any time. If you are diagnosed with or undergo a medical procedure for one of the specified critical illnesses we cover and you survive 10 days from diagnosis then the policy may pay out after you die in which case the amount of cover will be payable to your estate and may be subject to Inheritance Tax. If the policy is absolutely assigned, the amount of cover payable should not form part of the estate for Inheritance Tax purposes. The policy cannot be issued or assigned into a trust. 14 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER WHAT IF I WANT TO CANCEL OR CLAIM? You can cancel the policy at any time. When you first take out the policy you will have the opportunity to cancel. If you cancel within 30 days, we’ll refund any premiums you’ve paid. If you cancel the policy at a later stage, you will not get any money back if you pay your premiums monthly. If you pay annually you will receive a proportionate refund of your annual premium. To cancel or claim you can write to us at: Claims or Cancellations Department, Legal & General Assurance Society Limited, City Park, The Droveway, Hove, East Sussex BN3 7PY. Or call or email us: • For Life claims: 0800 137 101* life.claims@landg.com • For critical illness claims: 0800 068 0789* health.claims@landg.com • For Cancellations: 0370 010 4080* HOW DO I COMPLAIN? If you have a complaint about our service or would like a copy of our internal complaint handling procedure, please contact us at: Legal & General Assurance Society Limited, Four Central Square, Cardiff CF10 1FS 0370 010 4080* Making a complaint doesn’t affect your legal rights. If you’re not happy with the way we handle your complaint, you can talk to the Financial Ombudsman Service at: Exchange Tower, London E14 9SR 0800 023 4567 0300 123 9123 complaint.info@financial-ombudsman.org.uk www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk * Calls may be recorded and monitored. Call charges may vary. 15 LIFE INSURANCE AND CRITICAL ILLNESS COVER M www.legalandgeneral.com Legal & General Assurance Society Limited Registered in England and Wales No. 00166055 Registered office: One Coleman Street, London EC2R5AA We are authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority. 02/2024 QGI16569 THE FINANCIAL SERVICES COMPENSATION SCHEME (FSCS) We are covered by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS). You may be entitled to compensation from the scheme if we cannot meet our obligations. Whether or not you are able to claim and how much you may be entitled to will depend on the specific circumstances at the time. For further information about the scheme please contact the FSCS at: www.fscs.org.uk or call them on: 0800 678 1100. Alternative formats If you would like a copy of this in large print, braille, PDF or in an audio format, call us on 0370 010 4080. We may record and monitor calls. Call charges will vary.