Multifamily properties that generate stable revenues (via collection of rents from tenants) have
predictable profitability levels, which can make them attractive investments. By contrast, the
profit potential of riskier properties, such as those experiencing above-normal vacancy rates and
rental income declines (e.g., due to neighborhood location, poor management, or upkeep), may be
less predictable yet still be attractive investments. After substantial rehabilitation, a rental
property may appeal to tenants with more stable and higher incomes and possibly fetch a higher
resale value—or it may still fail to generate the anticipated rental income, resulting in
substantially greater losses. Thus, risker financial investment opportunities may translate into
greater profits or greater losses.
Real estate properties are categorized as Class A, Class B, and Class C, which provides
developers and lenders with the financial risk characteristics of the prospective investment
properties (defined in more detail in the text box below). Restating the preceding investment
strategy, acquiring a riskier Class C property may initially be less expensive and have greater
profit potential than a less risky Class A property investment. If, however, a Class C property after
rehabilitation would continue to generate low or below-market rents, the losses are likely to be
significant. In short, developers decide whether to invest in low- or high-risk multifamily
projects.
One criterion for determining whether to invest in Class A, Class B, or Class C income-
generating properties is current and expected future performance of rents. Anticipated rent growth
is a favored metric developers use to evaluate a prospective investment’s profitability.10
Occupancy rates also provide information about anticipated rent increases or decreases. As
multifamily properties’ occupancy rates increase (decrease), the overall rental income the
properties generate is more likely to increase (decrease).11 A related concept, the property
capitalization (cap) rate, is the annual net operating income generated by the property divided by
its purchase price. In other words, the cap rate measures a property’s yield, the annual return in
the form of (rental) income generated by the investment. (The cap rate does not account for any
outstanding debt such as a mortgage amount.) The interpretation of a high cap rate, however, may
be ambiguous. Although a higher cap rate may be indicative of higher profit potential, it may also
be indicative of a limited ability to raise future rents on some tenants (e.g., the elderly, those with
higher delinquency rates, and those currently with long leases).