Eczema, a.k.a., atopic dermatitis, is a chronic skin condition that causes patches of red, dry, and flaky skin that can trigger maddening itching and sometimes soreness and pain, too—the result of a rogue inflammatory response attacking your skin, which happens to be the largest organ in your body. Its symptoms can vary in both appearance and severity among different people and ethnic groups, per the National Eczema Association(NEA). And sometimes, the way people with eczema describe their condition varies, too.
 

 Take the term “papular” eczema. Some info-seekers out there who rely too much on Dr. Google might think this is a legit (and unique) type of atopic dermatitis—but our expert dermatologists are here to set the record straight.
 

 Papular Eczema
 What Is Papular Eczema?
 “Papular eczema really doesn’t mean something specific but when I imagine it, I imagine bumps rather than plaques,” says Scott Elman, M.D., a dermatologist and assistant professor of clinical dermatology and cutaneous surgery at University of Miami Health in Florida.
 

 These bumps, rather than flat, inflamed plaques, may be what eczema more often looks like on darker skin tones, adds Jeff Yu, M.D., a dermatologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and assistant professor of dermatology at Harvard Medical School in Boston. “We use that term but only for certain ethnic groups. We tend to see eczema that’s a little bit bumpier in African Americans and other people of color,” explains Dr. Yu.
 

 Meanwhile, Amy Paller, M.D., the chair of the Department of Dermatology at Northwestern Medicine in Evanston, IL, questions the term entirely. “I’ve never heard [of] ‘papular’ eczema,” she says. “We call it atopic dermatitis.”
 

 Meaning, people who say they have papular eczema likely mean their eczema is more bumpy than patchy. And those bumps may be more common in darker skin. But at the end of the day, it’s all just atopic dermatitis.
 

 Symptoms
 What Are the Symptoms of Papular Eczema?
 If your eczema is of the papular variety, you’ll likely see small, raised bumps on your skin rather than large, flat rashes. This symptom is more often seen on the skin of Black and brown people, say our experts. Beyond that, the majority of atopic dermatitis symptoms are the same. Here’s what you might experience, and it can happen anywhere on your body:
 

 Darkening of the skin around your eyes
 

 Dry, cracked skin
 

 Itching
 

 Oozing and crusting on the inflamed skin
 

 Raw, sensitive skin from scratching
 

 Swollen skin with a rash
 

 Thickened skin
 

 According to Dr. Elman, bumps, rashes, and irritated and inflamed skin can all look different on different people. On lighter skin, these skin symptoms look pink or red. On darker skin, areas affected by eczema may look more purple, burgundy, or brown.
 

 “That inflammation is absolutely seen differently on different skin tones,” adds Dr. Elman. “The redness may be more subtle. It could be a bit more purple. And it might be harder to discern on darker skin.”
 

 Causes
 What Causes Eczema?
 Your skin, when it’s acting like it’s supposed to, serves as a barrier between the inside of your body and the outside world. But, in eczema, “the skin barrier just stops working as well, so the body is exposed to things that it isn’t used to seeing, and that can trigger flares,” says Dr. Elman.
 

 A few things might cause that dysfunction in your skin barrier. For starters, your genes. Some people are born with a gene variant that interferes with the skin's ability to protect as it should, acording to Mayo Clinic.
 

 Bacteria is another possible culprit, per Mayo. Too much of the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus (or just “staph” for short) on the skin can crowd out the good bacteria and keep your skin barrier from doing its job.
 

 Either way, it’s that defective skin barrier that leads to all the problems in eczema.
 

 When you have a weak skin barrier, your skin can’t hold in moisture as well. And it’s unable to keep out bacteria, irritants, allergens, and potential environmental triggers like cigarette smoke. That faulty skin barrier—or all the germs and other stuff that creep in as a result—can set off an immune system reaction that leads to that itchy, inflamed, and irritated skin that you probably know all too well, Dr. Elman says.
 

 Diagnosis
 How Is Papular Eczema Diagnosed?
 There is no blood test, biopsy, or X-ray for atopic dermatitis. Instead, your dermatologist or primary care physician will likely look at your skin to check for the physical signs and symptoms of atopic dermatitis, Dr. Yu explains. Then they might ask whether you have family members with eczema. They may also want to know if you or a family member has food allergies, seasonal allergies or asthma since those can be risk factors for eczema, per the NEA.
 

 If your doctor does order some testing for you, these are usually done to rule out other problems, like a specific allergy for which you’d need what’s called a patch test.
 

 Home Remedies
 Home Remedies for Eczema
 If you’ve got mild eczema, chances are you can get it under control on your own. “Most people who have very mild eczema probably don't end up seeing a dermatologist,” Dr. Yu confirms.
 

 According to Dr. Yu, you might be able to keep your symptoms at bay with some of the following DIY and OTC solutions:
 

 Moisturize Your Skin
 It’s critical to moisturize as soon as you get out of the tub or the shower. “It’s important that you’re using moisturizing ointments, something that has the consistency of Vaseline or Aquaphor,” Dr. Yu advises.
 

 There’s a specific protocol for moisturizing when you have eczema: After bathing in lukewarm water, pat your skin dry, and never rub it. Apply any topical medications that you use. Then, within three minutes of patting dry, while the skin is still damp, slather on your moisturizer. This “soak and seal” method locks moisture in and reseals that broken skin barrier.
 

 Add Some Oatmeal
 Studies show that colloidal oatmeal can help bring moisture back to eczema skin. You can:
 

 Add it to your lukewarm bath
 

 Make it into a paste and press it directly into the affected area
 

 Use eczema products containing it
 

 Soak in a Bleach Bath
 “When you do a diluted bleach bath, similar to the concentration you find in a swimming pool, it has actually shown to be very anti-inflammatory,” says Dr. Yu.
 

 The NEA recommends a 10-minute bleach bath two to three times each week. Add a half-cup of household bleach to a full tub of lukewarm water. Soak for 10 minutes. Rinse off with clean water. Then, pat dry.
 

 P.S.: A 10-minute dip in the swimming pool gets the job done, too!
 

 Moisturizing Oils
 Some—but not all—oils can bring relief to eczema-inflamed skin. There’s evidence that sunflower oil, coconut oil, and shea butter have benefits for this type of irritation. But you can’t just grab any old oil from your kitchen.
 

 “Stay away from olive oil, advises Dr. Yu. “The fatty acids found in olive oil actually promote the growth of yeast on your skin.”
 

 You apply coconut or other oils to the skin twice a day, just as you would any moisturizer. Ideally, one application per day is right after you bathe when your skin is still damp. If coconut oil is your pick, go for “virgin” or “cold-pressed.” Any other extraction method uses chemicals that could irritate your skin even more, say the NEA.
 

 Anti-Itch Cream
 Use OTC Anti-Itch Cream
 Try an anti-itch cream containing 1% hydrocortisone no more than twice a day on the irritated areas. Apply it after your bath and before you moisturize. This steroid calms down itching, swelling and irritation by quelling the body’s inflammatory response.