Pharmacology of Intravenous β-Adrenergic Blockers
propranolol
Propranolol has an equal affinity for β1- and β2-receptors, lacks intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA), and has no α-adrenergic receptor activity. It is the most lipidsoluble β-blocker and generally has the most central nervous system side effects.
First-pass liver metabolism (90%) is very high, requiring much higher oral doses
than intravenous doses for pharmacodynamic effect.
The usual intravenous dose of propranolol initially is 0.5 to 1.0 mg titrated to
effect. A titrated dose resulting in maximum pharmacologic serum levels is 0.1 mg/kg.
The use of continuous infusions of propranolol has been reported after noncardiac
surgery in patients with cardiac disease. A continuous infusion of 1 to 3 mg/hr can
prevent tachycardia and hypertension but must be used cautiously because of the
potential of cumulative effects.
metoprolol
Metoprolol was the first clinically used cardioselective β-blocker (Table 8-2). Its
affinity for β1-receptors is 30 times higher than its affinity for β2-receptors, as
demonstrated by radioligand binding. Metoprolol is lipid soluble, with 50% of
the drug metabolized during first-pass hepatic metabolism and with only 3%
BOX 8-3 Effects of β-Adrenergic Blockers on Myocardial Ischemia
• Reductions in myocardial oxygen consumption
• Improvements in coronary blood flow
• Prolonged diastolic perfusion period
• Improved collateral flow
• Increased flow to ischemic areas
• Overall improvement in supply/demand ratio
• Stabilization of cellular membranes
• Improved oxygen dissociation from hemoglobin
• Inhibition of platelet aggregation
• Reduced mortality after myocardial infarction
BOX 8-4 Recommendations for Perioperative Medical Therapy
• Class I β-Blockers required in the recent past to control symptoms of angina or symptomatic arrhythmias or hypertension; β-blockers: patients at high cardiac risk, owing to
the finding of ischemia on preoperative testing, who are undergoing vascular surgery
• Class IIa β-Blockers: preoperative assessment identifies untreated hypertension, known
coronary disease, or major risk factors for coronary disease
• Class III β-Blockers: contraindication to β-blockade
Adapted from Eagle KA, Berger PB, Calkins H, et al: ACC/AHA guideline update for perioperative cardiovascular evaluation for noncardiac surgery-executive summary: A report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Update the 1996 Guidelines on
Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation for Noncardiac Surgery). J Am Coll Cardiol 39:542, 2002.
iICARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY, PHARMACOLOGY, AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
124
excreted renally. Protein binding is less than 10%. Metoprolol’s serum half-life
is 3 to 4 hours.
As with any cardioselective β-blocker, higher serum levels may result in greater
incidence of β2-blocking effects. Metoprolol is administered intravenously in 1- to 2-mg
doses, titrated to effect. The potency of metoprolol is approximately one half that of
propranolol. Maximum β-blocker effect is achieved with 0.2 mg/kg given intravenously.
esmolol
Esmolol’s chemical structure is similar to that of metoprolol and propranolol, except
it has a methylester group in the para position of the phenyl ring, making it susceptible to rapid hydrolysis by red blood cell esterases (9-minute half-life). Esmolol is not
metabolized by plasma cholinesterase. Hydrolysis results in an acid metabolite and
methanol with clinically insignificant levels. Ninety percent of the drug is eliminated in
the form of the acid metabolite, normally within 24 hours. A loading dose of 500 μg/kg
given intravenously, followed by a 50- to 300- μg/kg/min infusion, will reach steadystate concentrations within 5 minutes. Without the loading dose, steady-state concentrations are reached in 30 minutes.
Esmolol is cardioselective, blocking primarily β1-receptors. It lacks ISA and membrane-stabilizing effects and is mildly lipid soluble. Esmolol produced significant reductions in BP, HR, and cardiac index after a loading dose of 500 μg/kg and an infusion of
300 μg/kg/min in patients with coronary artery disease, and the effects were completely
reversed 30 minutes after discontinuation of the infusion. Initial therapy during anesthesia may require significant reductions in both the loading and infusion doses.
Hypotension is a common side effect of intravenous esmolol. The incidence of hypotension was higher with esmolol (36%) than with propranolol (6%) at equal therapeutic
endpoints. The cardioselective drugs may cause more hypotension because of β1-induced
myocardial depression and the failure to block β2 peripheral vasodilation. Esmolol appears
safe in patients with bronchospastic disease. In another comparative study with propranolol, esmolol and placebo did not change airway resistance whereas 50% of patients treated
with propranolol developed clinically significant bronchospasm.
labetalol
Labetalol provides selective α1-receptor blockade and nonselective β1- and β2-blockade.
The potency of β-adrenergic blockade is 5- to 10-fold greater than α1-adrenergic blockade. Labetalol has partial β2-agonist effects that promote vasodilation. Labetalol is moderately lipid soluble and is completely absorbed after oral administration. First-pass hepatic
metabolism is significant with production of inactive metabolites. Renal excretion of the
unchanged drug is minimal. Elimination half-life is approximately 6 hours.
In contrast to other β-blockers, clinically, labetalol should be considered a
peripheral vasodilator that does not cause a reflex tachycardia. BP and systolic vascular resistance decrease after an intravenous dose. Stroke volume (SV) and CO remain
unchanged, with HR decreasing slightly. The reduction in BP is dose related, and
acutely hypertensive patients usually respond within 3 to 5 minutes after a bolus dose
of 100 to 250 μg/kg. However, the more critically ill or anesthetized patients should
have their BP titrated beginning with 5- to 10-mg intravenous increments. Reduction
in BP may last as long as 6 hours after intravenous dosing.