Introduction
The skills, knowledge, and credentials obtained through education are widely believed to be
connected to positive occupational and economic outcomes. In recent decades, considerable
attention has been devoted to improving educational attainment levels of students with
disabilities. Several federal policies have aimed to require educators to pay greater attention to the
educational progress and attainment of students with disabilities, and many others provide for a
variety of supports with the goal of improving levels of attainment. Data collection efforts have
also been launched to allow for better tracking of relevant trends.
This report discusses policies aiming to promote educational attainment and examines trends in
high school graduation and college enrollment for students with disabilities. It begins with a
discussion of the laws related to the education of students with disabilities at the secondary and
postsecondary levels. Subsequent sections discuss the existing data on transition-aged students
with disabilities, what is currently known about such students, and federal legislation and other
factors that may have contributed to changes in students with disabilities’ high school graduation
rates and postsecondary enrollment over time.
The report offers a brief overview of what is currently known about the U.S. population of
students with disabilities in secondary and postsecondary education. It focuses on data gathered in
conjunction with federal programs and federally funded studies of nationally representative
samples of students with disabilities. It does not attempt to provide an overview or review of
existing research on transition-aged students with disabilities or to provide an in-depth
examination of the differences between the rights of and services afforded to students with
disabilities at the secondary and postsecondary levels. The next sections of the report provide an
overview of the education and civil rights laws that aim to support students with disabilities as
they work toward completing high school and potentially transition into further educational
pursuits.
Education Laws
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
The IDEA was originally enacted in 1975 (P.L. 94-142)
1
and was most recently reauthorized in
2004.
2
It is the primary federal act providing for special education and related services for
children with disabilities between birth and 21 years old.3 Approximately 13% of the K-12
student population received IDEA services in the 2013-2014 school year (SY).4
The IDEA provides states with grants that support the identification, evaluation, and provision of
special education services to children with disabilities. States may receive grants under the

1 When P.L. 94-142, the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, was reauthorized in 1990 (P.L. 101-476), its
name was changed to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA).
2 The Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004, P.L. 108-446.
3 For more information, see CRS Report R41833, The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), Part B: Key
Statutory and Regulatory Provisions, by Kyrie E. Dragoo and CRS Report R43631, The Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA), Part C: Early Intervention for Infants and Toddlers with Disabilities, by Kyrie E. Dragoo.
4 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, 2015, Table
204.30, “Children 3 to 21 years old served under Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), Part B, by type of
disability: Selected years, 1976-77 through 2013-14.”
Students with Disabilities: High School to Postsecondary Transition
Congressional Research Service R44887 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED 2
condition that, among other requirements, they provide each qualifying student with (1) an
individualized education program (IEP) outlining the student’s goals, and the accommodations,
special education, and related services that the school will provide to the student, and (2) a free
appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive environment (LRE). This means
specially designed instruction to meet students’ needs, provided to the greatest extent possible
with their general education peers and at no cost to their families.
Beginning with its 1990 reauthorization,5
the IDEA has required that the IEPs of students who are
16 years old or older contain a statement of transition goals and services. Transition services are
defined as:
A coordinated set of activities for a child with a disability that—
(A) is designed to be within a results-oriented process, that is focused on improving
the academic and functional achievement of the child with a disability to facilitate the
child’s movement from school to post-school activities, including post-secondary
education, vocational education, integrated employment (including supported
employment), continuing and adult education, adult services, independent living, or
community participation;
(B) is based on the individual child’s needs, taking into account the child’s strengths,
preferences, and interests; and
(C) includes instruction, related services, community experiences, the development
of employment and other post-school adult living objectives, and, when appropriate,
acquisition of daily living skills and functional vocational evaluation. 6
The 1997 and 20047
amendments to the IDEA have supported students with disabilities
graduating with regular diplomas and transitioning to postsecondary education by
 increasing local education agencies’ (LEAs) accountability for improving the
performance of students with IEPs,
 emphasizing students’ progress toward meaningful educational and
postsecondary goals in the IEP process, and
 requiring states to develop IDEA performance goals and indicators, including
dropout and graduation rates, and to report to the Secretary of Education (the
Secretary) and the public on the progress of the state and of students with
disabilities in the state toward these indicators at least every two years.
8
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA)
The ESEA was originally enacted in 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6301 et seq.). It was most recently
reauthorized by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA; P.L. 114-95) in 2015. The ESEA is the
largest source of federal aid to K-12 education, supporting educational and related services for
low-achieving and other students attending elementary and secondary schools with high
concentrations of students from low-income families. The largest grant program in the ESEA is

5 P.L. 101-476.
6
 20 U.S.C. §1401(a)(34).
7
In the 2004 reauthorization of the IDEA, Congress stated in their findings, “As the graduation rates for children with
disabilities continue to climb, providing effective transition services to promote successful post-school employment or
education is an important measure of accountability for children with disabilities.” (P.L. 108-446, §601 (c)(14)).
8 P.L. 105-17, §612 (a)(16).
Students with Disabilities: High School to Postsecondary Transition
Congressional Research Service R44887 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED 3
Title I-A. There are a number of educational accountability requirements that states, LEAs, and
schools must meet to receive Title I-A funds. For example, amendments to the ESEA enacted
under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001(NCLB; P.L. 107-110) included several educational
accountability provisions that aimed to promote the educational progress of all students in schools
served. These provisions have subsequently been amended through the ESSA.
Over half of public elementary and secondary schools receive Title I-A funds. While students
with disabilities benefit from this funding, they are not specifically targeted by it. However, many
of the ESEA’s educational accountability provisions do require that schools pay particular
attention to students with disabilities and likely have an effect on them. For example, when the
ESEA was amended through the NCLB in 2001, provisions were adopted requiring states to
develop and implement a state accountability system to ensure that schools and LEAs made
progress with respect to student achievement.9 Under the NCLB provisions, student progress was
not only systematically measured and monitored for the broad population of K-12 students served
under the ESEA but also for specific subgroups of students, of which “students with disabilities”
was one.
Under NCLB provisions, student proficiency in relation to academic performance standards was
regularly tracked in selected subject areas, as were high school graduation rates. The NCLB
contained high-stakes accountability provisions featuring varied consequences for schools in
which a sufficient percentage of students or subgroups of students, such as students with
disabilities, failed to make sufficient academic progress in relation to the academic achievement
and high school graduation standards. The accountability provisions of the NCLB, and those in
place after the ESEA was amended through the ESSA, emphasize holding all students and all
subgroups of students (including students with disabilities) to the same standards and levels of
academic achievement, and closing gaps between subgroups of students. To comply with these
accountability provisions, schools and school districts are required to pay specific attention to the
academic progress and graduation rates of students with disabilities.
Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA)
The HEA was originally enacted in 1965 (P.L. 89-329). It was most recently reauthorized in 2008
by the Higher Education Opportunity Act (HEOA; P.L. 110-315) in 2008, which authorized
appropriations for most HEA programs through FY2014. Funding is still being provided for HEA
programs through appropriations acts. The HEA authorizes student financial aid programs that
help students and their families meet the costs of attending postsecondary institutions, a series of
targeted grant programs that assist students transitioning into postsecondary education, and grants
that support program and institutional development at some colleges and universities. While
students with disabilities benefit from many of the HEA’s student financial aid programs, the
programs that specifically target support and assistance to students with disabilities are the TRIO
Student Support Services (SSS) program10 and Comprehensive Transition and Postsecondary
(CTP) programs for students with intellectual disabilities.
11

9 ESEA, §1111(b)(2).
10 Higher Education Act (HEA), P.L. 113-67, §402(D); 20 U.S.C. 1070a–14.
11 P.L. 113-67, §760; 20 U.S.C. 1140.
Students with Disabilities: High School to Postsecondary Transition
Congressional Research Service R44887 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED 4
The TRIO SSS program served over 200,000 students through grants to over 1,000 projects in
SY2015-2016.
12 The program, originally enacted in 1992 through amendments to the HEA,
13
provides support services to primarily low-income first generation college students with the aim
of improving their retention, graduation rates, financial and economic literacy, and transfers from
two-year to four-year schools.14 TRIO SSS programs are also intended to foster an institutional
climate supportive of potentially disconnected students. These include students with disabilities,
students who are limited English proficient, students from groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in postsecondary education, students who are homeless children and youths,
and students who are in foster care or aging out of the foster care system. Under the TRIO SSS
program, the U.S. Department of Education (ED) makes competitive grants to Institutions of
Higher Education (IHEs) and combinations of IHEs. Grantees must provide statutorily defined
services to an approved number of participants. At least two-thirds of participants must be either
students with disabilities15 or low-income, first-generation college students. The remaining onethird of participants must be low-income students, students with disabilities, or first-generation
college students. Also, at least one-third of the participating students with disabilities must be
low-income.
The CTP programs for students with intellectual disabilities served approximately 1,000 students
through grants to 66 institutions in SY2015-2016.
16 The programs, enacted through the HEOA,
provide transition support for students with intellectual disabilities.
17 Under provisions in the
HEA, CTP programs for students with intellectual disabilities are not required to lead to a
recognized credential (e.g., bachelor’s or associate’s degree, certificate) or adhere to the same
durational requirements that regular postsecondary programs must meet (e.g., a certain number of
credit-bearing clock hours). Instead, CTP programs require students with intellectual disabilities
to receive curriculum advising, participate at least part-time in courses or training with students
who do not have intellectual disabilities, and prepare for gainful employment.
Civil Rights Laws
In addition to the education laws that fund programs for students with disabilities, there are two
civil rights laws that protect them in secondary and postsecondary education from discrimination
based on their disabilities: Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (P.L. 93-112) and the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA; 42 U.S.C. §12101 et seq.).

12 U.S. Department of Education, Student Support Services Program Awards, FY2016, https://www2.ed.gov/programs/
triostudsupp/awards.html.
13 Higher Education Amendments of 1992, P.L. 102-325, §402(a)(2).
14 For more background information, see CRS Report R42724, The TRIO Programs: A Primer, by Cassandria Dortch.
15 “Disability” is defined in §12102 of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA; 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.).
16 The U.S. Department of Education (ED) tracks the estimated enrollment of the 43 (out of 66) CTP programs that
receive TPSID grants (see footnote 17). An estimated 730 students participate in these TPSID programs (an average of
approximately 17 students per program). There are an additional 23 CTP programs that do not report student
enrollment rates. CRS estimates that if these 23 CTP programs serve an average of 12 or more students, and those
students are added to the 730 students served in the TPSID programs, more than 1,000 students would be served by
CTP programs in total.
17 A new CTP grant program, the Model Transition Programs for Students with Intellectual Disabilities into Higher
Education (TPSID), which is intended to help IHEs create or expand high-quality, inclusive-model CTP programs for
students with intellectual disabilities, was included in the Higher Education Opportunity Act of 2008 (HEOA; P.L. 110-
315).
Students with Disabilities: High School to Postsecondary Transition
Congressional Research Service R44887 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED 5
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act18
Section 504 prohibits discrimination on the basis of a disability by protecting the rights of people
with disabilities to access programs receiving federal funding. Section 504 also provides for
accommodations such as extended time on tests for students with learning disabilities, accessible
classrooms for students with orthopedic impairments, and large print or braille materials for
students who are visually impaired. These accommodations are available at all levels of
schooling—preschool to postsecondary—in schools that receive any federal funding.
All children with disabilities attending K-12 public schools who are served under Section 504 are
entitled to a FAPE and an individualized accommodations plan, often called a “504 plan.” At the
postsecondary level, Section 504 requires IHEs to provide students with disabilities with
appropriate academic adjustments and equitable access to educational programs and facilities.
ED’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR) reported that in SY2011-2012, more than 6 million K-12
students were served under the IDEA, and slightly less than three-quarters of a million K-12
students were served under Section 504.
19 This means approximately 89% of children with
disabilities served by K-12 public schools are served under the IDEA and approximately 11% of
students with disabilities served by K-12 public schools are served solely by Section 504.20 At the
postsecondary level, however, the IDEA no longer applies to students with disabilities; instead,
all students with disabilities attending IHEs that receive federal funding are protected by Section
504. Most IHEs have a 504 coordinator or a disabled student services (DSS) office on campus
that coordinates accommodations such as extended time on tests, early course registration, and
physical accommodations and access to campus facilities for students with disabilities.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA)
The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, most recently amended by the ADA Amendments
Act of 2008 (together, ADA),
21 includes a conforming amendment to the Rehabilitation Act that
broadens the meaning of the term “disability” in both the ADA and Section 504 to protect people
who have or are regarded as having a physical or mental disability that impacts one or more
major life activities. The ADA provides broad nondiscrimination protection in employment,
public services, public accommodations and services operated by private entities, transportation,
and telecommunications for individuals with disabilities. The ADA states that its purpose is “to
provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against
individuals with disabilities.” In 2008, in response to Supreme Court and lower court decisions
that narrowly interpreted the term “disability,” Congress passed the ADA Amendments Act to,
among other things, “carry out the ADA's objectives of providing 'a clear and comprehensive
national mandate for the elimination of discrimination' and 'clear, strong, consistent, enforceable
standards addressing discrimination' by reinstating a broad scope of protection to be available
under the ADA.”
Both Section 504 and the ADA require that educational institutions at all levels provide equal
access for people with disabilities. The ADA extends the requirements of Section 504 from only
institutions receiving federal financial assistance to all institutions, with some exceptions for

18 Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 is commonly referred to simply as “Section 504.”
19 U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights, Civil Rights Data Collection, 2011-12, http://ocrdata.ed.gov.
20 Because having an IEP and a 504 plan is considered duplicative, students with IEPs usually only have IEPs, and
students who have disabilities that do not qualify for IDEA services (e.g., a disability that impacts a child medically or
physically but not educationally) have 504 plans.
21 42 U.S.C. §12101 et seq.
Students with Disabilities: High School to Postsecondary Transition
Congressional Research Service R44887 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED 6
institutions controlled by religious organizations. The ADA impacts schools from pre-K to
postsecondary because it extends the rights of people with disabilities to access facilities and
receive accommodations, allowing them to participate in the activities of both public and private
institutions. 