4. Paid Transactions
Identity of Seller
Sales are made by Disney DTC or the seller identified at the time of sale, if different. If you
have questions about your order, please contact the seller at the address provided and they will
assist you. Some digital storefronts on the Disney Services are operated by third parties and, in
that case, different or additional sale terms may apply, which you should read when they are
presented to you.
Digital Content and Virtual Items
We may make applications, games, software or other digital content available on the Disney
Services for you to license for a one-time fee. When purchasing a license to access such material
from a Disney Service, charges will be disclosed to you on the Disney Service before you
complete the license purchase.
Your purchase of a virtual item or in-game currency is a payment for a limited, non-assignable
license to access and use such content or functionality in the Disney Services with no right to
reproduce, distribute, communicate to the public, make available to the public or transform any
Disney Service via any online media, in any media format or channel now known or hereafter
devised (except as may be expressly described or contemplated within the Disney Service).
Virtual items (including characters and character names) or in-game currency purchased or
available to you in the Disney Services can only be used in connection with the Disney Services
where you obtained them or where they were developed by you as a result of game play. These
items are not redeemable or subject to refund and cannot be traded outside of the Disney
Services for money or other items for value. We may modify or discontinue virtual items or ingame currency at any time.
Digital Movie Codes
Digital codes originally packaged in a combination disc + code package (a package that includes
a DVD, Blu-Ray, and/or 4K/UHD disc(s) and a digital code) may not be sold separately and may
be redeemed only by an individual who obtains the code in the original combination disc + code
package, or by a family member of that individual. Digital codes are not authorized for
redemption if sold separately. You may use digital movie codes to obtain licensed access to
digital movies only as specifically authorized under these terms and conditions and the terms and
conditions of the participating provider of digital content through which you access or download
the digital movie. Digital movie codes sold, distributed, purchased, or transferred in a manner
inconsistent with these terms and conditions are subject to being invalidated.
Digital Movie Code Returns. If you do not agree to the above terms and conditions for
redeeming a digital movie code obtained by you or a family member in an original combination
disc + code package, you may return the combination disc + code package to Disney for a refund
subject to the conditions provided at this link.
Subscriptions
Some Disney Services require paid subscriptions to access. By signing up for a subscription,
you agreed that your subscription will be automatically renewed and, unless you cancel your
subscription, you authorized us to charge your payment method for the renewal term. The period
of auto-renewal will be the same as your initial subscription period unless otherwise disclosed to
you at the time of sale. The renewal rate will be no more than the rate for the immediately prior
subscription period, excluding any promotional and discount pricing, unless we notify you of a
rate change prior to your auto-renewal, in which case you will have the right to cancel the
renewal of your subscription. From time to time, we may offer a free trial subscription for a
Disney Service. If you register for a free trial subscription, we will begin to bill your account
when the free trial subscription expires, unless you cancel your subscription before that time.
When you subscribe to a Disney Service (other than semi-annual and annual subscriptions), you
have the right to cancel your contract within fourteen (14) days from the date the transaction is
concluded and you will receive a full refund of the subscription fee paid. For semi-annual and
annual subscriptions, if notice of cancellation is received within the first thirty (30) days
following the first day of initial billing, you will receive a refund of the subscription fee paid. If
we refund your subscription fee, you will still be obligated to pay other charges incurred by you
in the course of using the Disney Service prior to the date of cancellation. If you pay a periodic
subscription fee for a Disney Service, we will provide you with reasonable notice of changes to
the fees or billing methods in advance of their effective date and you will be able to cancel your
subscription prior to such change. If you subscribed online, we will give you the option of
cancelling the subscription online.
The Order Process
You will have the opportunity to review and confirm your order, including delivery address (if
applicable), payment method and product details. We will send to you a notice when we accept
your order and our acceptance will be deemed complete and for all purposes to have been
effectively communicated to you at the time we send the notice. At such time, the contract for
sale will be made and become binding on both you and us. The risk of loss in any goods you
purchase and the responsibility to insure them passes to you when the relevant goods are
delivered.
We reserve the right to refuse or cancel any order prior to delivery. Some situations that may
result in your order being cancelled include system or typographical errors, inaccuracies in
product or pricing information or product availability, fairness among customers where supplies
are limited, or problems identified by our credit or fraud departments. We also may require
additional verification or information before accepting an order. We will contact you if any
portion of your order is cancelled or if additional information is required to accept your order. If
your order is cancelled after we have processed your payment but prior to delivery, we will
refund your payment.
Payments and Billing
When you provide payment information, you represent and warrant that the information is
accurate, that you are authorized to use the payment method provided, and that you will notify us
of changes to the payment information. We reserve the right to utilize third party payment card
updating services to obtain current expiration dates on credit cards and debit cards.
Right of Cancellation; Return of Goods
You may have the right to cancel an order placed for a Disney Service - depending on the nature
of the Disney Service. Please read the following information carefully so you understand your
right of cancellation.
If you wish to cancel, you must do so by following the cancellation instructions for the particular
Disney Service. A sample cancellation form is available here.
Cancelling Subscriptions
Please see the information above on the process for cancelling subscriptions in our Subscriptions
section.
Digital Content
When you purchase a license to access digital content or virtual items, you will be given an
opportunity to consent to delivery at the time of purchase. By consenting to delivery, you
acknowledge that you have lost the right to cancel. License purchase fees paid for digital content
are non-refundable.
Physical Goods
You have the right, within thirty (30) days from the date of your receipt of physical goods, to
cancel our contract with you and return the goods. This right does not apply to goods stated by
us on the Disney Services to be non-returnable, including but not limited to:
• Any products with a seal, where the seal is broken, such as audio and video recordings,
computer software, and CD’s, DVD’s or other physical media that have been supplied in
sealed packaging; and
• Personalized items.
Personalized Goods
We reserve the right to refuse personalized orders at our discretion. Inappropriate use of our
personalization service will cause your order to be cancelled and any payment refunded.
These cancellation rights are separate and in addition to your rights should any item we supply
be faulty.
If you are returning goods that are not faulty, you may be required to pay for the cost of returning
the goods to us and we may deduct a reasonable amount if you use the goods.