**Risk, Crisis and Resilience Services**

Global Reach, Rapid Response and Local Expertise
Your safety and security are our mission. We provide clear, targeted, flexible pre- and post-incident solutions built around that primary priority.

Our expert team has operated in more than 80 countries and across multiple disciplines, including kidnap for ransom, extortion, detention and evacuation as well as security training, risk assessments and business continuity planning.

Our team of specialist crisis and risk advisors are strategically located across North America, Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Asia. Constellis’ risk analysts monitor, research and advise on current and emerging threats. This enables us to deliver a global spread of expertise and vital rapid-response capabilities with outstanding local and regional knowledge, contacts and language capabilities.

Managing Organizational Risk
Organizations need to take risks in order to succeed. Managing that risk allows opportunities to be pursued while reducing the potential for negative impact.

Our Risk, Crisis and Resilience services help corporate and governmental institutions, international organizations and small to medium sized businesses disrupt threats and eliminate vulnerabilities to effectively exercise control over the risks taken while enhancing organizational resilience. We work with our customers to employ a full cycle of risk mitigation and crisis management strategies:

Avert
We help reduce the likelihood of a serious incident.

Improved threat and vulnerability awareness
Anticipating dangers
Comprehensive context & risk assessment
Enhanced risk treatment measures
Good risk intelligence
Reliable travel tracking
Effective personal safety & security training
Prepare
We ready you to protect your business and mitigate negative consequences in worst-case scenarios.

Broad scenario development
Extensive contingency & continuity planning
Crisis management training
Respond
We ensure timely deployment of appropriate internal and external resources.

Manage an incident
Provide business continuity
Bring the situation under control as quickly as possible
Risk, Crisis and Resilience Services
We incorporate all the current risk, crisis, business continuity and organizational resilience standards in our methodology including ISO 31000, 22301, 22316, BS 65000, CEN/TS 17091 as well as the principles of Enterprise Security Risk Management. Our bespoke approach is tailored to each customer’s unique needs and concerns.

Our risk, crisis and resilience services incorporate the following:

Personnel Risk
Your people are your greatest asset and ensuring their safety and security is not only an essential part of being a good employer but also a necessary step in meeting your duty of care obligations. Our personnel risk services ensure that you are providing the right information and training for the people who work for you to help them look after themselves and make better decisions and also enable you to properly assist them when they encounter problems. These tailored services include:

Personal security training (HEAT)
Travel security briefings
Travel safety & security planning
Travel safety platform through our partner LifeLine Response:
Global threat intel
Location-based tracking
Proactive travel security alerts
2-way mass notification
Organizational Risk
Organizations face numerous risks not only when operating in complex and fragile environments but also in those places where they least expect to encounter problems.

We lead the way for our customers, helping them to develop policies, processes and procedures, allowing them to evaluate and manage risk and succeed in their business endeavors. Good risk management is about facilitating operations and managing risk to an acceptable level, not obstructing business activities.

Our organizational risk advisory and management services provide the necessary support to ensure that you have the right system and management in place to meet your needs. These services include:

Security risk briefings
Threat monitoring
Strategic risk assessments
Organizational resilience reviews
Security management planning
Security management training
Crisis Management
When the worst happens, we deliver rapid, targeted and adaptable crisis management, communications and response solutions to enable our customers to overcome the challenges they face.

Constellis’ crisis response consultants are well-versed in providing advice and support in the heat of a crisis as well as before a crisis strikes, helping you to be better prepared to deal with all the problems you may face when a critical incident threatens your business. We cover all kinds of crisis scenarios and have extensive experience in dealing with kidnapping, piracy, extortion and detention. We offer a turnkey solution that comprises training, planning, response and recovery services including:

Crisis response for all scenarios
Crisis management planning
Crisis communications planning
Business continuity planning
Contingency planning (including evacuation)
Crisis management training
Crisis simulation exercises
Crisis communications training
Insight and Analysis
Accurate, timely information is an essential component to any risk management program. At Constellis, our insight and analysis services integrate strategic understanding with local and empirical knowledge, enabling our customers to make effective decisions for existing operations and future investments.

We draw on a large network of resources to deliver social, economic, political and security intelligence to our customers through bespoke reporting services including:

Security Threat Assessments
Geographical Risk Analysis & Reporting
Kidnap for Ransom Analysis & Reporting
Special Assignments