 PSCR UAS 1.0: Unmanned Aerial Systems Flight and Payload Challenge The inaugural UAS challenge took place in 2018 in Fredericksburg, Virginia. In this challenge, PSCR examined how engineering design tradeoffs for flight time and endurance capabilities affect the UAS while carrying a communications payload. This use case examined how a UAS could extend cellular network coverage to “boots on the ground” first responders in a communications-denied location. The challenge was to incorporate a payload that would mimic the weight of a small cellular system on a deployable UAS. UAS were required to achieve 90 minutes of hovering flight endurance while carrying defined payloads of 10, 15, and 20 lb (4.5, 6.8, and 9.1 kg), the typical weights for a small communications system. The total weight of the flight vehicle at liftoff had to be less than 55 lb (24.9 kg) to ensure portability and compliance with FAA regulations. The UAS also had to complete maneuvering and positioning tests as required in the NIST Open Test Lanes and Scenarios test methods with the various attached payloads. [10] The Open Test Lanes methodologies helped simulate and evaluate flight maneuvers, such as position-hold and yaw movements, that a UAS pilot may observe in a responder event. Evaluators used 2D and 3D fiducials as reference points and ground truths to assess each UAS with repeatable and measurable results. By performing these test procedures in an outdoor venue, PSCR could closely replicate the environment that a UAS may encounter while carrying essential communications equipment. In the UAS 1.0 challenge, PSCR found that hybrid fuel solutions, such as a battery and gasoline combination, performed the best. Multi-rotor and aircraft frames supportive of Vertical Takeoff and Landing (VTOL) greatly influenced the performance and accuracy of the aircraft's flight. Deficiencies that PSCR observed were mainly in the form of aircraft control and the need for further tuning of flight software to maintain and hold position. Essential loiter functions and automated flight mechanisms were challenging to maintain, possibly due to the developing UAS marketplace, the device’s prototype nature, and the design of the payload transport functionality. PSCR UAS 2.0: First Responder UAS Endurance Challenge The UAS 2.0 challenge continued the objectives of UAS 1.0 but focused more on endurance. Weight limitations were increased to include larger UAS with the expectation of better control, longer endurance, and innovative ideas. The use case for UAS 2.0 closely matched the communications functions presented in UAS 1.0 but contained an additional use case for longduration search and rescue scenarios.  13 NIST TN 2295 July 2024 The key design requirements in UAS 2.0 included a single payload weight of 10 lb (4.5 kg), which simulated the smallest available cellular network device. The final event took place between 2020 and 2021. Due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, each contestant performed the final event tasks and measurements within their team locality. The NIST-designed payload provided to the contestants for their final flights comprised an independent position data capture and dissemination system for test measurement and validation. As in UAS 1.0, contestants performed a hover endurance test and used the NIST Open Test Lanes as a ground truth measurement system as evaluation methodologies. Larger UAS sizes, up to 100 lb (45.3 kg), were permitted with the expectation of greater endurance, longer flight times over 90 minutes, and increased aircraft stability. Contestants had to provide evidence of airspace authorizations for aircraft weight and height operation exceptions from their respective governing authorities, e.g., FAA Certificate of Authorization. Mirroring the results of the first challenge, UAS with propulsion systems and multi-rotor hybrid battery-gasoline solutions performed the best. Novel propulsion systems, such as hydrogen fuel cells, were also demonstrated in the final event. Some contestants proposed fixed-wing VTOL UAS in the early competition stages, but these ideas failed to progress past theoretical design due to engineering complexity. Flight control and stability functions were also improved with a standard payload, providing more aircraft design flexibility. PSCR found that contestants who started with existing designs early in the competition or those who tested early and frequently had better success in later stages. The winning UAS solution consisted of a hex-rotor design with a hybrid electric-gasoline engine propulsion system. The maximum flight time of this solution in the final test event was approximately 112 minutes, with a total takeoff weight of 54.9 lb (24.9 kg.)  PSCR UAS 3.0: First Responder UAS Triple Challenge The UAS 3.0 challenge aimed to create a multi-use, multi-payload UAS platform for first responder search and rescue use cases. The challenge comprised three distinct research challenges that ran concurrently. The final stage of these competitions took place concurrently in June of 2022 in Starkville, Mississippi. 4.3.1. PSCR UAS 3.1: First Responder UAS Triple Challenge: FastFind The design goals of UAS 3.1 focused on the use case of finding missing persons quickly in heavily forested areas. In this challenge, UAS required optical systems that could penetrate thick forest canopies and withstand environmental conditions and hazards. The UAS had to be rapidly deployable and endure the mission's duration.  In the UAS 3.1 challenge, flight vehicles had to meet a weight requirement of 55 lb (24.9 kg) or less, including attachments or payloads. A five-point scale evaluated the flight autonomy of the aircraft, with each level describing a range of independence that required less pilot intervention. Additionally, real-time video had to be transmitted to the pilot's ground control station, while onboard recording was mandatory on the aircraft. The vehicles had to demonstrate the capability for degraded takeoff and landing while operating in environments not typically suited for 14 NIST TN 2295 July 2024 standard flight operations, such as areas with uneven surfaces, dirt, or gravel. The final scenario required all competitors to find multiple designated targets within a 60-minute timeframe. In the final event, contestants used adaptive search technologies, including real-time computer vision, machine learning, and human verification, to assist in finding targets. Competitors used one or multiple camera technologies, including infrared, thermal, and neutral-density optical filters, digital filters, and telephoto optical systems, to help expedite recovery time. One contestant utilized a novel technique called Airborne Optical Sectioning, which incorporates a form of synthetic aperture imaging to integrate multiple camera technologies to suppress occlusions computationally. [11] Environmental factors at the test location, including high heat and humidity, negatively affected the contestant’s aircraft performance and the optical systems' efficiency. These conditions also generated false positive matches by computer vision algorithms used in the search. 4.3.2. PSCR UAS 3.2: First Responder UAS Triple Challenge: LifeLink UAS 3.2 LifeLink evaluated techniques using a UAS to provide continuous broadband communications in a service-denied area. The UAS carried a communication relay system to extend communications with first responder stations on the ground.  UAS 3.2 contained identical UAS requirements for weight, autonomy, takeoff, and landing conditions as UAS 3.1. Specific to the LifeLink challenge, each UAS was required to have a wireless Wi-Fi transceiver to transmit internet protocol data to responders on the ground and to a NISTprovided bandwidth measurement server. A Wi-Fi antenna or array attached to the UAS could enhance coverage by optimizing signal power and direction. Each contestant’s UAS was not limited beyond FAA Part 107 requirements; contestants could choose the optimal testing height for their solution. UAS designs in UAS 3.2 contained Wi-Fi configurations that could transmit simulated voice and data streams up to 800 ft (244 m) from the aircraft. Omnidirectional antennas provided optimal coverage and higher bandwidth speeds for areas with more first responders in a small, circular geographic area. Directional antenna configurations offered the best coverage for distancefocused applications when correctly oriented. When combined with repeater technology, the WiFi signal could transmit further, but each added repeater would diminish the bandwidth speeds. High heat, humid weather conditions, and forest foliage negatively impacted coverage, distance, and bandwidth speeds. 