2. Merger Arbitrage
 Merger arbitrage is an investing strategy that capitalizes on the difference in price between the target company’s stock price and the price offered by the acquirer in a merger or acquirement. 
 

 The differences between merger arbitrage and other types of arbitrage lie in the potential risks and rewards associated with the transaction. Merger arbitrage is less risky than other forms of arbitrage due to the long-term nature of the transaction and the ability to hedge some of the risks associated with the acquisition.
 

 Merger arbitrage provides a high potential return with relatively low risk. It is also a relatively low-cost strategy and does not require the trader to take on a large amount of leverage.
 

 Pros of merger arbitrage include the fact that investors capitalizes on the difference in price between the target company’s stock price and the price offered by the acquirer, as well as the potential for a high return on investment.
 

 Cons of merger arbitrage include the fact that there is a great deal of uncertainty surrounding the transaction and the potential for the deal to fall through. This leads to a loss of capital for the investor.
 

 An example of merger arbitrage is if a company announces a merger with another company, and the target company’s stock price jumps above the price offered by the acquirer. An investor could purchase stock in the target company and hold it until the acquisition was completed, thereby capitalizing on the price difference.
 

 3. Convertible Arbitrage
 Convertible arbitrage is an investment strategy where an investor will purchase a convertible bond and simultaneously sell short the stock into which the convertible are converted. Convertible arbitrage’s idea is that the investor profits from a discrepancy in the convertible arbitrage spread.
 

 Convertible arbitrage’s biggest advantage is that it offers investors an opportunity for additional profits and helps reduce market risk by diversifying across different asset classes. Convertible arbitrage strategies have historically experienced lower volatility than traditional equity strategies.
 

 The main disadvantage of convertible arbitrage is that it involves riskier activities than traditional arbitrage. It involves taking on the stock and the convertible bond risk. The liquidity risk of the underlying securities could be quite high.
 

 4. Risk Arbitrage
 Risk arbitrage is an investment strategy that seeks to take advantage of price discrepancies between related securities, often caused by corporate events such as mergers, restructurings, and takeover bids. Risk arbitrage involves buying the undervalued security and selling the overvalued security, with the expectation that the prices will converge as the corporate events unfold. 
 

 The main difference between risk arbitrage and other forms of arbitrage is that it involves taking a short-term risk, as there is a possibility that the arbitrageur will not be able to close out the positions prior to the prices converging. This could either result in a loss or a gain, depending on the direction and magnitude of the price movements.
 

 The main advantage of risk arbitrage is the potential to earn high returns in a short period of time. Arbitrageurs are able to take advantage of price discrepancies that exist in the market, and if the prices converge as expected, large profits are realized. 
 

 The main disadvantage of risk arbitrage is that it involves taking a short-term risk. The arbitrageur could incur losses if the prices do not move in the expected direction or magnitude, In addition, risk arbitrage is time-sensitive, and the arbitrageur needs to be able to close out the positions prior to the prices converging in order to take advantage of the mispricing.
 

 An example of risk arbitrage is the acquisition of a company by another company. If the market prices of the target company are lower than the offer price, the arbitrageur buy shares of the target company and short-sells shares of the acquiring company. If the market prices of the target company converge to the offer price, the arbitrageur closes out the positions and earns a profit.
 

 5. Dividend Arbitrage
 Dividend arbitrage is a form of arbitrage that involves taking advantage of the difference in share prices before and after the ex-dividend date. The dividend arbitrage strategy involves buying the stock before the ex-dividend date and then selling it on the same day at a higher price. This allows investors to capitalize on the difference in share prices without directly engaging in the stock market.
 

 The difference between dividend arbitrage and other forms of arbitrage is that, in the case of dividend arbitrage, investors are taking advantage of the difference in share prices before and after the ex-dividend date. Other forms of arbitrage involve taking advantage of pricing discrepancies in different markets. 
 

 The main advantage of dividend arbitrage is that it allows investors to capitalize on the difference in share prices without directly engaging in the stock market. This benefits investors who need more time or resources to actively trade in the stock market. 
 

 The main disadvantage of dividend arbitrage is that it requires investors to buy the stock before the ex-dividend date. This means that there is a risk that the stock price could fall significantly before the ex-dividend date, resulting in a loss for the investor.
 

 For example, if an investor buys a stock for Rs. 50 per share before the ex-dividend date and sells it for Rs. 55 per share on the same day, the investor will make a profit of Rs. 5 per share. This profit is made without having to actively engage in the stock market.
 

 6. Futures Arbitrage
 Futures Arbitrage is a strategy that involves taking advantage of discrepancies in pricing between two different markets for a fututes instrument. Futures arbitrage involves buying the futures in one market at a lower price and selling it in another at a higher price, thus making a profit. 
 

 The main difference between Futures Arbitrage and other arbitrage strategies is that Futures Arbitrage involves taking advantage of discrepancies in the prices of futures contracts. Other arbitrage strategies involve taking advantage of discrepancies between two or more different types of securities.
 

 Pros of Futures Arbitrage include the potential for high returns in a relatively short period and the ability to capitalize on discrepancies in market prices without possessing the underlying instrument.
 

 Cons of Futures Arbitrage include the high risk associated with this strategy and the fact that it requires a good understanding of the markets and the instruments being traded.
 

 An example of Futures Arbitrage would be buying a gold futures contract in the US and selling the same contract in India at a higher price, thus making a profit.
 

 7. Pure Arbitrage
 Pure arbitrage is taking advantage of a price difference between two or more markets to make a risk-free profit. Pure arbitrage involves simultaneously buying and selling the same financial asset, commodity, or currency in different markets to take advantage of the price difference.
 

 The main advantage of pure arbitrage is that it is a low-risk strategy. Since the investor is simultaneously buying and selling the same asset, at least one of their orders is guaranteed to be profitable.
 

 The main disadvantage of pure arbitrage is that it is a complex and time-consuming process. It requires access to multiple markets and acting quickly to take advantage of the price discrepancies before they disappear.
 

 For example, an investor notices that gold prices are higher in New York than in London. The investor buys gold in London and then simultaneously sells it in New York to take advantage of the price discrepancy and make a risk-free profit.