PART 1. THE PRIMARY HEADACHES 
1. Migraine 
1.1 Migraine without aura 
A. At least five attacks fulfilling criteria B-D 
B. Headache attacks lasting 4-72 hours (when untreated or unsuccessfully treated) 
C. Headache has at least two of the following four characteristics: 1. unilateral location 2. pulsating quality 3. moderate or severe pain intensity 4. aggravation by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity (eg, walking or climbing stairs) 
D. During headache at least one of the following: 1. nausea and/or vomiting 2. photophobia and phonophobia 
E. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
1.2 Migraine with aura 
A. At least two attacks fulfilling criteria B and C 
B. One or more of the following fully reversible aura symptoms: 1. visual 2. sensory 3. speech and/or language 4. motor 5. brainstem 6. retinal 
C. At least three of the following six characteristics: 1. at least one aura symptom spreads gradually over ≥5 minutes 2. two or more aura symptoms occur in succession 3. each individual aura symptom lasts 5-60 minutes 4. at least one aura symptom is unilateral 5. at least one aura symptom is positive 6. the aura is accompanied, or followed within 60 minutes, by headache 
D. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
1.2.1 Migraine with typical aura 
A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 1.2 Migraine with aura and criterion B below 
B. Aura with both of the following: 1. fully reversible visual, sensory and/or speech/language symptoms 2. no motor, brainstem or retinal symptoms. 
1.2.1.1 Typical aura with headache 
A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 1.2.1 Migraine with typical aura and criterion B below 
B. Headache, with or without migraine characteristics, accompanies or follows the aura within 60 minutes. 
1.2.1.2 Typical aura without headache 
 A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 1.2.1 Migraine with typical aura and criterion B below 
B. No headache accompanies or follows the aura within 60 minutes. 
1.2.2 Migraine with brainstem aura 
A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 1.2 Migraine with aura and criterion B below 
B. Aura with both of the following: 1. at least two of the following fully reversible brainstem symptoms: a) dysarthria b) vertigo c) tinnitus d) hypacusis e) diplopia f) ataxia not attributable to sensory deficit g) decreased level of consciousness  (GCS ≤13) 2. no motor or retinal symptoms. 
1.2.3 Hemiplegic migraine 
A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 1.2 Migraine with aura and criterion B below 
B. Aura consisting of both of the following: 1. fully reversible motor weakness 2. fully reversible visual, sensory and/or speech/language symptoms. 
1.2.3.1 Familial hemiplegic migraine 
A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 1.2.3 Hemiplegic migraine 
B. At least one first- or second-degree relative has had attacks fulfilling criteria for 1.2.3 Hemiplegic migraine. 
1.3 Chronic migraine 
A. Headache (migraine-like or tension-type-like) on ≥15 days/month for >3 months, and fulfilling criteria B and C 
B. Occurring in a patient who has had at least five attacks fulfilling criteria B-D for 1.1 Migraine without aura and/or criteria B and C for 1.2 Migraine with aura 
C. On ≥8 days/month for >3 months, fulfilling any of the following: 1. criteria C and D for 1.1 Migraine without aura 2. criteria B and C for 1.2 Migraine with aura 3. believed by the patient to be migraine at onset and relieved by a triptan or ergot derivative 
D. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
2. Tension-type headache (TTH) 
2.1 Infrequent episodic TTH 
A. At least 10 episodes of headache occurring on <1 day/month on average (<12 days/year) and fulfilling criteria B-D 
B. Lasting from 30 minutes to 7 days 
C. At least two of the following four characteristics: 1. bilateral location 2. pressing or tightening (non-pulsating) quality 3. mild or moderate intensity 4. not aggravated by routine physical activity such as walking or climbing stairs 
D. Both of the following: 1. no nausea or vomiting 2. no more than one of photophobia or phonophobia 
E. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
2.2 Frequent episodic TTH 
As 2.1 except: 
A. At least 10 episodes of headache occurring on 1-14 days/month on average for >3 months (12 and <180 days/year) and fulfilling criteria B-D. 
2.3 Chronic TTH As 2.1 except: 
A. Headache occurring on 15 days/month on average for >3 months (180 days/year), fulfilling criteria B-D 
B. Lasting hours to days, or unremitting 
D. Both of the following: 1. no more than one of photophobia, phonophobia or mild nausea 2. neither moderate or severe nausea nor vomiting 
3. Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias 
3.1 Cluster headache 
A. At least five attacks fulfilling criteria B-D 
B. Severe or very severe unilateral orbital, supraorbital and/or temporal pain lasting 15-180 minutes (when untreated) 
C. Either or both of the following: 1. at least one of the following symptoms or signs, ipsilateral to the headache: a) conjunctival injection and/or lacrimation b) nasal congestion and/or rhinorrhoea c) eyelid oedema d) forehead and facial sweating e) miosis and/or ptosis 2. a sense of restlessness or agitation 
D. Occurring with a frequency between one every other day and 8 per day E. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis.
3.1.1 Episodic cluster headache  
A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 3.1 Cluster headache and occurring in bouts (cluster periods) B. At least two cluster periods lasting from 7 days to 1 year (when untreated) and separated by pain-free remission periods of ≥3 months. 
3.1.2 Chronic cluster headache 
A. Attacks fulfilling criteria for 3.1 Cluster headache, and criterion B below 
B. Occurring without a remission period, or with remissions lasting <3 months, for at least 1 year. 
3.4 Hemicrania continua 
A. Unilateral headache fulfilling criteria B-D 
B. Present for >3 months, with exacerbations of moderate or greater intensity 
C. Either or both of the following: 1. at least one of the following symptoms or signs, ipsilateral to the headache: a) conjunctival injection and/or lacrimation b) nasal congestion and/or rhinorrhoea c) eyelid oedema d) forehead and facial sweating e) miosis and/or ptosis 2. a sense of restlessness or agitation, or aggravation of the pain by movement 
D. Responds absolutely to therapeutic doses of indomethacin 
E. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
4. Other primary headache disorders 
4.3 Primary headache associated with sexual activity 
A. At least two episodes of pain in the head and/or neck fulfilling criteria B-D 
B. Brought on by and occurring only during sexual activity 
C. Either or both of the following: 1. increasing in intensity with increasing sexual excitement 2. abrupt explosive intensity just before or with orgasm 
D. Lasting from 1 minute to 24 hours with severe intensity and/or up to 72 hours with mild intensity 
E. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
4.5 Cold-stimulus headache 
4.5.1 Headache attributed to ingestion or inhalation of a cold stimulus 
A. At least two episodes of acute frontal or temporal headache fulfilling criteria B and C 
B. Brought on by and occurring immediately after a cold stimulus to the palate and/or posterior pharyngeal wall from ingestion of cold food or drink or inhalation of cold air 
C. Resolving within 10 minutes after removal of the cold stimulus 
D. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
4.7 Primary stabbing headache 
A. Head pain occurring spontaneously as a single stab or series of stabs and fulfilling criteria B and C 
B. Each stab lasts for up to a few seconds 
C. Stabs recur with irregular frequency, from one to many per day 
D. No cranial autonomic symptoms 
E. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
4.8 Nummular headache 
A. Continuous or intermittent head pain fulfilling criterion B 
B. Felt exclusively in an area of the scalp, with all of the following four characteristics: 1. sharply-contoured 2. fixed in size and shape 3. round or elliptical 4. 1-6 cm in diameter 
C. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
4.9 Hypnic headache 
A. Recurrent headache attacks fulfilling criteria B-D 
B. Developing only during sleep, and causing wakening 
C. Occurring on ≥10 days/month for >3 months 
D. Lasting from 15 minutes up to 4 hours after waking 
E. No cranial autonomic symptoms or restlessness 
F. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 
4.10 New daily persistent headache (NDPH) 
A. Persistent headache fulfilling criteria B and C 
B. Distinct and clearly-remembered onset, with pain becoming continuous and unremitting within 24 hours 
C. Present for >3 months 
D. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis. 