 THE ROLE OF CONTRACT LAW IN SUPPLY CHAINS
Food supply chains are normally composed of vertical and horizontal chains of contracts
connecting various core value-chain actors from producers to consumers, as well as
contractual relations among operators of support services (e.g. purchase of inputs, financial
agreements). All contracts in the chain should be fair and equitable for all parties and
administered in good faith. The contracts should clarify the parties’ rights and responsibilities,
paying attention to the essential elements of a contract as stipulated in the national contract
law. Commonly, these essential elements would include, at least, the identification of the
parties, offer and acceptance, obligations, price determination, remedies in case of partial or
non-compliance, termination and provisions on dispute resolution, including alternative dispute
resolution (ADR). In the context of a pandemic, the risk thatsome of these elements may be
compromised is increased.
Contracts should always ensure fair and equitable risk allocation and management. Certain risk
allocation and management would – to some extent – be covered by the concepts of force
majeure and/or change of circumstances, which are designed to respond to both natural
disasters (disease outbreaks, disasters, etc.) and societal events (export bans, movement
restrictions, etc.). Domestic legislation often requires four simultaneous conditions to be
fulfilled before the application of force majeure: the event should be 1) unforeseeable, 2)
unavoidable 3) outside the parties’ control and 4) it should objectively prevent one or both of
them from performing. Change of circumstances (hardship-like situations) generally requires
the first three pre-conditions. Such change in circumstances would not necessarily prevent
parties from performing, but it would fundamentally change the basis on which the contract
was formed and alter the balance of the relationship, making it unfair to hold either or both
parties to their original obligations (UNIDROIT, FAO and IFAD, 2015).
Parties who concluded a contract prior to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the subsequent
imposition of related restrictions, may claim that either force majeure or change of
circumstances, depending on the legal and factual context, apply to their ongoing contractual
relationship. The final application of force majeure or change of circumstances would depend
on a national court’s or an ADR mechanism’s interpretation of the applicable criteria and may
excuse compliance with, or suspend, the affected obligations or lead to renegotiation of the
contract. For contracts concluded after the declaration of the emergency, the application or
not of these clauses would depend on whether further changes in circumstances, connected
to the emergency, can be considered “unforeseeable”, months into the pandemic.
This uncertainty needs to be taken into account by those who enter into new contracts under
current conditions. The negotiation and drafting of new contracts should aim at providing
clarity on what should happen to the contractual relationship due to the continuing and
emerging impacts of COVID-19. Considerable contractual innovation, as supported and
protected by the principle of freedom of contract, is required to ensure equitable risk
allocation. One option could be to explicitly agree in the contract to consider COVID-19 and its
related upheavals as force majeure, or change of circumstances, where the domestic
legislation allows partiesto depart from the standard andmost probably narrowlegal definitions
of these terms. Another option would be for the contract to mandate the parties to
renegotiate the contract, either after some time has passed or if a certain event triggers the
need to do so (such as new movement restrictions imposed by the government). Finally, the
contracts could also explicitly consider COVID-19 and its effects when drafting remedies for
contractual breaches, such as waiving the use of
remedies or opting for less disruptive and more lenient options when the underlying breach
was demonstrably caused by the pandemic.
Unfortunately, contractual innovation may also open the door for the stronger party in a
contract to take advantage and impose imbalancesin risk allocation between the parties
through the introduction of unfair contractual terms and practices. A classic example of an
unfair practice would be for the contract to allow only one party to unilaterally terminate the
contract without notifying or discussing it in advance with the other party. On a general level,
this requires governments to either adopt, or increase enforcement of, unfair contractual
practices legislation to prohibit the use of contractual terms and practices that are considered
unfair. Enhanced enforcement should begin immediately, as abuses may already be
happening. At the same time, if there are gaps, the reform of the legislative framework should
commence in earnest as it requires an investment of effort and time and will likely go beyond
the duration of the current COVID-19 crisis. In the context of food supply chains, at least for
nodessuch as contracts between smallholder producers and their buyers, governments may
consider creating either mandatory or voluntary registries for contracts. These can increase
transparency and legal certainty for parties, when they know that their contract (with sensitive
commercial information removed) may be accessible to a defined audience (Viinikainen and
Bullón, 2018).
Greater prominence and application of the common, but not universally accepted, principle of
good faith should be promoted in this time of uncertainty and can be effective if it is backed by
the threat of enforcement. The principle of good faith requires the parties to interact honestly
and fairly, and refrain from taking actions that would deny their counterparty from receiving
the expected benefits of the contract. Essentially, good faith infuses the contract relationship
with the kind of flexibility required to address the complications that come with a pandemic or
any other global emergency. Good faith may involve applying, orrefraining from adopting,
certain conduct (UNIDROIT, FAO and IFAD, 2015). In the context of COVID-19 this could include
greater flexibility for delivery times, honest and timely exchange of information between the
parties on the impacts that the emergency has had to better anticipate difficulties, as well as
willingnessto renegotiate to better adjust the contractual relationship to the rapidly changing
circumstances.
Finally, as good contractual practice, it is important to include reference to grievance
mechanisms in the contract. This is even more important in the uncertainty created by COVID19, which may increase the likelihood of both breaches and disputes. Deciding on the method
of dispute resolution in advance is important as, once a dispute has arisen, it may be difficult
for the parties to agree on how to resolve it. In general, for smallholders in particular, the use
of ADR mechanisms, such as arbitration and mediation, may be preferable as they tend to be
less costly, less formal and faster in dealing with disputes than the courts.