Vuori, The Athleisure Brand Valued At $4 Billion, Is Halfway To Opening 100 Stores By 2026
 

 Say athleisurewear and one name comes immediately to mind: Lululemon. For athletic wear, one name dominates the conversation, NikeNKE -1%, with honorable mention to Adidas and Puma.
 Vuori is far behind the leaders in both realms, but then the market share leaders had a big head start. Joe Kudla founded Vuori only in 2014, while Lululemon got started in 1998 and Nike back in 1964.
 But Vuori aims to become a brand as big if not bigger than those market leaders:
 “Vuori wants to be a relevant household name 20 years from now. We have no interest in growing really, really fast just to hit some number and then falling out of favor with consumers or having a major quality issue,” Kudla shared with Retail Dive.
 

 Slow And Steady Wins The Race
 

 Kudla has followed a methodical path to growth by correcting mistakes and filling whitespace left by the big guys. That strategy propelled it forward fast to reach a valuation of $4 billion in late 2021 after receiving $400 million in venture funding by Softback Investment Advisors and Trinity West Venture, according to Pitchbook.
 

 Now, Bloomberg reports it is considering an IPO this year, though the company has not confirmed the rumors.
 

 Nonetheless, Kudla has accomplished much with Vuori in its ten short years. Before becoming an entrepreneur, he was working as an accountant and had little fashion experience, though he did a modeling stint for a few years, which gave him a passion for the business.
 

 It was as an athlete, particularly his mountain climbing experience, where he found the business opportunity: filling the performance gap in men’s athletic apparel. And the company’s name came from those roots: Vuori is the Finnish word for “mountain.”
 

 The brand’s first product was a simple pair of men’s shorts made from super-soft, high-quality fabrics that look good enough to wear around town, but also provide support and wick away moisture when running the track. And whether in town or on the track, the shorts were super-comfortable to wear.
 

 Vuori became an instant hit with athletes who valued its superior quality and didn’t want to be a walking – or running – billboard for another brand. By year two, it was generating $1 million in DTC revenues and even more remarkable for a startup, it was profitable, credited to Kudla’s accounting background that kept him fixated on the books.
 

 “We never acquired a customer at a loss,” Kudla shared with Fast Company. “We were hyper-focused on cash flow, and getting the unit economics of a transaction profitable.”
 Reaching Further
 

 Growing buzz about the brand put it on REI’s radar, which after testing it in a few stores, found such strong customer affinity that it put it into more than 150 locations.
 

 By 2018, Vuori was generating upwards of $30 million in sales, much of it coming from wholesale distribution, which generates less revenue than DTC but gives a brand credibility and added exposure by having a respected retailer choose to carry it. Currently, it’s retail partners include NordstromJWN -1.3%, Selfridges, Harrods, Equinox Gyms, Barry’s Bootcamp and numerous specialty independent retailers.
 

 It was also in 2018 that Vuori launched into women’s apparel, reaching the other half of the athletic apparel market, estimated at $158 billion in North America in 2023 and expected to grow 6% CAGR through 2027, according to McKinsey.
 

 That combined with opening its first store in hometown Encinitas, CA got the brand’s flywheel humming. Currently, it operates over 50 stores in 17 states and internationally in London, Shanghai and Seoul, up from just four in 2019 all located in California. Plans are to open 20 to 25 stores over the next two or so years to reach 100 by 2026.
 

 Tasked with that mission is vice president of retail Catherine Pike who joined the company in 2019. A lawyer by training, Pike came from fitness franchiser Fit4Mom where she led franchise operations and before that, she spent eight years with Lululemon, rising from local store to regional manager.