Minimum Baseline Security Standard (MBSS) and Autonomous Security Assurance

The structural heterogeneity and distribution of the 6G network, coupled with the diverse ecosystem in
computing nodes and devices, results in a coarse degree of data access management. This may lead to a
malicious actor being able to penetrate the security of the edge device and so compromise this aspect of
the system. Untrusted computing nodes joining the network may hack user data at the edge of the network
and interrupt the operation. Additionally, because of the performance limitations of edge nodes, these
devices cannot resist network attacks, such as man-in-the-middle and denial-of-service, which lead to the
breakdown of the edge network and instability18
.
In the case of 6G, building a secure supply chain is vital, vendor compliance is a must and security assurance
[GSMA NESAS-2.0, ISO], OWASP vulnerability19, the integrity of any third-party elements - together with
trust and privacy - is also extremely important. Attacks and issues that compromise privacy and security
often occur in three main areas of the network: the infrastructure layer security, the network layer security,
and the application-level security (which consists of User plane traffic, Control plane traffic and
Management plane traffic20).
Establishing a reliable level of security policies, procedures, and Minimum Baseline Security Standard
(MBSS) for all network functions is extremely important to minimize risks21. There is a need for centralized
identity governance for resource management and user access – the lack of which may cause network
exploitation of applications and systems, leading to unauthorized access of user data, log files and
manipulation of AI/ML models. A prominent example is poisoning and backdoor attacks for manipulating
the data used for training an AI model, with countermeasures for prevention and detection including use
of data from trusted sources, protecting the supply chain and sanitizing data. Another attack type are
adversarial attacks that target the model in operation by using specially crafted inputs to mislead the model.
Such attacks can be mitigated by expanding the training process (adversarial training), introducing
additional modules for detecting unusual ingests and sanitizing input data. Attacks that compromise the
confidentiality and privacy of the training data or the model’s parameters can be addressed with techniques
like differential privacy and homomorphic encryption. Additionally, restricting the number and type of
queries to the model and tailoring query outputs can help mitigate these risks22
.
Other attacks jeopardize the confidentiality and privacy of the data used to train the model or the model’s
parameters. They can be dealt with by approaches such as: differential privacy and homomorphic
encryption, introducing restrictions on the number and type of queries to the model and tailoring the
output to queries. Therefore, a Unified Framework (UF) is necessary to prevent attacks on the AI/ML model,
with a centralized assurance procedure used for evaluation and assessment, before moving it to
production. Then, on a regular basis, the model should be evaluated to ensure it provides the desired
functionality and is sufficiently robust to changes in input data both natural and (potentially) adversarial.