CHAPTER THREE:
POLICY PRIORITY AREAS
The Policy has the following six priority areas:
a. Managing population growth;
b. Inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized populations;
c. Climate change adaptation and resilience;
d. Information Management;
e. Financing; and
f. Capacity strengthening, linkages, and coordination.
Priority Area 1: Managing Population Growth
Managing population growth is about applying a rights-based approach to making the
environment conducive for women and men to decide on the number of children they would like
to have. The goal is to reduce population growth rate to levels that are sustainable. This is crucial
in ensuring that Malawi achieves its long-term aspiration of being an inclusively wealthy and
self-reliant nation, as it will contribute to accelerating the attainment of the country's lowermiddle-income economy status by 2030. The population of Malawi has been growing rapidly due
to high fertility. This priority area addresses drivers of rapid population growth, use of modern
contraceptive methods especially among the youth, child survival, and early childbearing.
Policy Statements
a) The Policy will ensure that the fertility decline is accelerated.
Strategies:
i. Intensify population education campaigns including adopting modern family planning
practices of having few children and use of contraception;
ii. Identify and implement optimum models for providing quality reproductive health
services including modern family planning to both in and out of school youth to reduce
unmet need for family planning information and services and teenage pregnancies; and
iii. Strengthen implementation of Malawi’s Costed Implementation Plan for Family Planning,
FP2030, and ICPD25 commitments.
b) The Policy will ensure that child and maternal mortality is reduced.
Strategies:
i. Support child immunization campaigns;
14
ii. Promote skilled care attendance before, during, and after birth in population messages;
and
iii. Promote child and maternal nutrition for the special 1,000 days.
c) The Policy will ensure that on-set of childbearing is delayed (No children by children).
Strategies:
i. Eliminate child marriages;
ii. Scaling up efforts to reduce teenage pregnancies:
iii. Intensify comprehensive sexuality education for in and out of school youth;
iv. Keep girls in school for at least twelve years;
v. Strengthen implementation of the school re-admission policy; and
vi. Identify and implement optimum models for providing quality RH services including
modern family planning to both in and out of school youth to reduce unmet need for
family planning information and services and teenage pregnancies.