Abstract
 Within thirty years, we will have the technological
 means to create superhuman intelligence. Shortly after,
 the human era will be ended.
 Is such progress avoidable? If not to be avoided, can
 events be guided so that we may survive? These questions
 are investigated. Some possible answers (and some further
 dangers) are presented.
 _What is The Singularity?_
 The acceleration of technological progress has been the central
 feature of this century. I argue in this paper that we are on the edge
 of change comparable to the rise of human life on Earth. The precise
 cause of this change is the imminent creation by technology of
 entities with greater than human intelligence. There are several means
 by which science may achieve this breakthrough (and this is another
 reason for having confidence that the event will occur):
 o The development of computers that are "awake" and
 superhumanly intelligent. (To date, most controversy in the
 area of AI relates to whether we can create human equivalence
 in a machine. But if the answer is "yes, we can", then there
 is little doubt that beings more intelligent can be constructed
 shortly thereafter.
 o Large computer networks (and their associated users) may "wake
 up" as a superhumanly intelligent entity.
 o Computer/human interfaces may become so intimate that users
 may reasonably be considered superhumanly intelligent.
 o Biological science may find ways to improve upon the natural
 human intellect.
 The first three possibilities depend in large part on
 improvements in computer hardware. Progress in computer hardware has
 followed an amazingly steady curve in the last few decades [16]. Based
 largely on this trend, I believe that the creation of greater than
 human intelligence will occur during the next thirty years. (Charles
 Platt [19] has pointed out the AI enthusiasts have been making claims
 like this for the last thirty years. Just so I'm not guilty of a
 relative-time ambiguity, let me more specific: I'll be surprised if
 this event occurs before 2005 or after 2030.)
 What are the consequences of this event? When greater-than-human
 intelligence drives progress, that progress will be much more rapid.
 In fact, there seems no reason why progress itself would not involve
 the creation of still more intelligent entities -- on a still-shorter
 time scale. The best analogy that I see is with the evolutionary past:
 Animals can adapt to problems and make inventions, but often no faster
 than natural selection can do its work -- the world acts as its own
 simulator in the case of natural selection. We humans have the ability
 to internalize the world and conduct "what if's" in our heads; we can
 solve many problems thousands of times faster than natural selection.
 Now, by creating the means to execute those simulations at much higher
 speeds, we are entering a regime as radically different from our human
 past as we humans are from the lower animals.
 From the human point of view this change will be a throwing away
 of all the previous rules, perhaps in the blink of an eye, an
 exponential runaway beyond any hope of control. Developments that
 before were thought might only happen in "a million years" (if ever)
 will likely happen in the next century. (In [4], Greg Bear paints a
 picture of the major changes happening in a matter of hours.)
 I think it's fair to call this event a singularity ("the
 Singularity" for the purposes of this paper). It is a point where our
 models must be discarded and a new reality rules. As we move closer
 and closer to this point, it will loom vaster and vaster over human
 affairs till the notion becomes a commonplace. Yet when it finally
 happens it may still be a great surprise and a greater unknown. In
 the 1950s there were very few who saw it: Stan Ulam [27] paraphrased
 John von Neumann as saying:
 One conversation centered on the ever accelerating progress of
 technology and changes in the mode of human life, which gives the
 appearance of approaching some essential singularity in the
 history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them,
 could not continue.
 Von Neumann even uses the term singularity, though it appears he
 is still thinking of normal progress, not the creation of superhuman
 intellect. (For me, the superhumanity is the essence of the
 Singularity. Without that we would get a glut of technical riches,
 never properly absorbed (see [24]).)
 In the 1960s there was recognition of some of the implications of
 superhuman intelligence. I. J. Good wrote [10]:
 Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine
 that can far surpass all the intellectual activities of any
 any man however clever. Since the design of machines is one of
 these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine could
 design even better machines; there would then unquestionably
 be an "intelligence explosion," and the intelligence of man
 would be left far behind. Thus the first ultraintelligent
 machine is the _last_ invention that man need ever make,
 provided that the machine is docile enough to tell us how to
 keep it under control.
 ...
 It is more probable than not that, within the twentieth century,
 an ultraintelligent machine will be built and that it will be
 the last invention that man need make.
 Good has captured the essence of the runaway, but does not pursue
 its most disturbing consequences. Any intelligent machine of the sort
 he describes would not be humankind's "tool" -- any more than humans
 are the tools of rabbits or robins or chimpanzees.
 Through the '60s and '70s and '80s, recognition of the cataclysm
 spread [28] [1] [30] [4]. Perhaps it was the science-fiction writers
 who felt the first concrete impact. After all, the "hard"
 science-fiction writers are the ones who try to write specific stories
 about all that technology may do for us. More and more, these writers
 felt an opaque wall across the future. Once, they could put such
 fantasies millions of years in the future [23]. Now they saw that
 their most diligent extrapolations resulted in the unknowable ...
 soon. Once, galactic empires might have seemed a Post-Human domain.
 Now, sadly, even interplanetary ones are.
 What about the '90s and the '00s and the '10s, as we slide toward
 the edge? How will the approach of the Singularity spread across the
 human world view? For a while yet, the general critics of machine
 sapience will have good press. After all, till we have hardware as
 powerful as a human brain it is probably foolish to think we'll be
 able to create human equivalent (or greater) intelligence. (There is
 the far-fetched possibility that we could make a human equivalent out
 of less powerful hardware, if were willing to give up speed, if we
 were willing to settle for an artificial being who was literally slow
 [29]. But it's much more likely that devising the software will be a
 tricky process, involving lots of false starts and experimentation. If
 so, then the arrival of self-aware machines will not happen till after
 the development of hardware that is substantially more powerful than
 humans' natural equipment.)
 But as time passes, we should see more symptoms. The dilemma felt
 by science fiction writers will be perceived in other creative
 endeavors. (I have heard thoughtful comic book writers worry about
 how to have spectacular effects when everything visible can be
 produced by the technically commonplace.) We will see automation
 replacing higher and higher level jobs. We have tools right now
 (symbolic math programs, cad/cam) that release us from most low-level
 drudgery. Or put another way: The work that is truly productive is the
 domain of a steadily smaller and more elite fraction of humanity. In
 the coming of the Singularity, we are seeing the predictions of _true_
 technological unemployment finally come true.
 Another symptom of progress toward the Singularity: ideas
 themselves should spread ever faster, and even the most radical will
 quickly become commonplace. When I began writing, it seemed very easy
 to come up with ideas that took decades to percolate into the cultural
 consciousness; now the lead time seems more like eighteen months. (Of
 course, this could just be me losing my imagination as I get old, but
 I see the effect in others too.) Like the shock in a compressible
 flow, the Singularity moves closer as we accelerate through the
 critical speed.