Circuit Split over the Food and Drug 
Administration’s Denial of Applications 
Seeking to Market Flavored E-Cigarettes, Part 
1 of 2  
April 5, 2024 
Electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS) products—products that go by many common names, such as 
e-cigarettes and vape pens—are generally required to receive prior authorization from the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) before they can be lawfully marketed in the United States. Before FDA issued 
regulations in 2016 to subject these products to the premarket review process, however, many of them 
were already being sold on the U.S. market and were allowed to remain there while FDA implemented the 
application and review process. These products come in a variety of forms and flavors, from tobacco and 
menthol flavors based on the flavors of traditional combustible cigarettes to other flavors based on the 
flavors of fruit, candy, and other sweets (“flavored ENDS products”). While limited studies of certain 
ENDS products show that they contain substantially lower levels of toxins than combustible cigarettes, 
indicating a benefit to current adult smokers who switch completely to using ENDS products, flavored 
ENDS products have been shown to be particularly attractive to youth. In a 2016-2017 study, for instance, 
93.2% of youth ENDS product users reported that their first use was with a flavored product. In 2018, the 
Surgeon General issued an advisory on the “e-cigarette epidemic among youth.”  
Since the initial deadline in September 2020 for ENDS product manufacturers to submit their premarket 
tobacco product applications (PMTAs), FDA has received millions of applications for ENDS products. To 
date, the agency has authorized 23 tobacco-flavored ENDS products for lawful marketing and has not 
authorized any flavored ENDS products. Many applicants that have received a marketing denial order 
(MDO) for their flavored ENDS products have filed petitions in U.S. Courts of Appeals throughout the 
country to challenge the denial of their PMTAs. Of the courts that have considered these petitions, the 
Second, Third, Fourth, Sixth, Seventh, Ninth, Tenth, and D.C. Circuits have sided with FDA and denied 
the petitions or requests to stay the agency’s MDOs. The Eleventh and Fifth Circuits, on the other hand, 
have sided with the ENDS manufacturers and vacated FDA’s MDOs, remanding the applications to FDA 
for reconsideration. This circuit split sets the stage for potential Supreme Court review regarding what 
information FDA may require applicants seeking to market flavored ENDS products to provide as part of
their PMTAs. This two-part Sidebar examines the circuit split. Part I provides an overview of the Family 
Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (TCA) regulatory framework, relevant FDA actions related 
to ENDS products, and the agency’s review and denial of the PMTAs involving flavored ENDS products. 
Part II provides an overview of the litigation challenging those FDA orders, the court decisions to date, 
and certain preliminary observations for consideration by Congress.