Item 1C. Cybersecurity
We recognize the critical importance of maintaining the safety and security of our systems and data and have a
holistic process for overseeing and managing cybersecurity and related risks. This process is supported by both
management and our Board of Directors.
The Chief Information Office, which maintains our cybersecurity function, is led by our Chief Information Officer
(CIO), who reports to our CEO. The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) reports to the CIO and generally is
responsible for management of cybersecurity risk and the protection and defense of our networks and systems. The
CISO manages a team of cybersecurity professionals with broad experience and expertise, including in cybersecurity
threat assessments and detection, mitigation technologies, cybersecurity training, incident response, cyber forensics,
insider threats and regulatory compliance.
Our Board of Directors is responsible for overseeing our enterprise risk management activities in general, and each
of our Board committees assists the Board in the role of risk oversight. The full Board receives an update on the
Company’s risk management process and the risk trends related to cybersecurity at least annually. The Audit and
Risk Committee specifically assists the Board in its oversight of risks related to cybersecurity. To help ensure
effective oversight, the Audit and Risk Committee receives reports on information security and cybersecurity from
the CISO at least four times a year.
In addition, the Company’s Enterprise Risk Management Council (ERMC) considers risks relating to cybersecurity,
among other significant risks, and applicable mitigation plans to address such risks. The ERMC is comprised of the
Executive Leadership Team, as well as the Chief Accounting Officer, Chief Compliance Officer, Corporate
Secretary, Chief Sustainability Officer, Treasurer and Vice President, Internal Audit. The CIO and CISO attend each
ERMC meeting. The ERMC meets during the year and receives periodic updates on cybersecurity risks from the
CIO and CISO. We have an established process and playbook led by our CISO governing our assessment, response
and notifications internally and externally upon the occurrence of a cybersecurity incident. Depending on the nature
and severity of an incident, this process provides for escalating notification to our CEO and the Board (including our
Lead Independent Director and the Audit and Risk Committee chair).
NORTHROP GRUMMAN CORPORATION
-22-
Our approach to cybersecurity risk management includes the following key elements:
• Multi-Layered Defense and Continuous Monitoring – We work to protect our computing environments and
products from cybersecurity threats through multi-layered defenses and apply lessons learned from our
defense and monitoring efforts to help prevent future attacks. We utilize data analytics to detect anomalies
and search for cyber threats. Our Cybersecurity Operations Center provides comprehensive cyber threat
detection and response capabilities and maintains a 24x7 monitoring system which complements the
technology, processes and threat detection techniques we use to monitor, manage and mitigate
cybersecurity threats. From time to time, we engage third party consultants or other advisors to assist in
assessing, identifying and/or managing cybersecurity threats. We also periodically use our Internal Audit
function to conduct additional reviews and assessments.
• Insider Threats – We maintain an insider threat program designed to identify, assess, and address potential
risks from within our Company. Our program evaluates potential risks consistent with industry practices,
customer requirements and applicable law, including privacy and other considerations.
• Information Sharing and Collaboration – We work with government, customer, industry and/or supplier
partners, such as the National Defense Information Sharing and Analysis Center and other governmentindustry partnerships, to gather and develop best practices and share information to address cyber threats.
These relationships enable the rapid sharing of threat and vulnerability mitigation information across the
defense industrial base and supply chain.
• Third Party Risk Assessments – We conduct information security assessments before sharing or allowing
the hosting of sensitive data in computing environments managed by third parties, and our standard terms
and conditions contain contractual provisions requiring certain security protections.
• Training and Awareness – We provide awareness training to our employees to help identify, avoid and
mitigate cybersecurity threats. Our employees with network access participate annually in required training,
including spear phishing and other awareness training. We also periodically host tabletop exercises with
management and other employees to practice rapid cyber incident response.
• Supplier Engagement – We provide training and other resources to our suppliers to support cybersecurity
resiliency in our supply chain. We also require our suppliers to comply with our standard information
security terms and conditions, in addition to any requirements from our customers, as a condition of doing
business with us, and require them to complete information security questionnaires to review and assess
any potential cyber-related risks depending on the nature of the services being provided.
While we have experienced cybersecurity incidents in the past, to date none have materially affected the Company
or our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows. We continue to invest in the cybersecurity and
resiliency of our networks and to enhance our internal controls and processes, which are designed to help protect our
systems and infrastructure, and the information they contain. For more information regarding the risks we face from
cybersecurity threats, please see “Risk Factors.”
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS AND PROJECTIONS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information we are incorporating by reference contain statements that
constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Words such as “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “may,” “could,” “should,” “plan,” “project,” “forecast,”
“believe,” “estimate,” “guidance,” “outlook,” “trends,” “goals” and similar expressions generally identify these
forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements relating to our
future financial condition, results of operations and/or cash flows. Forward-looking statements are based upon
assumptions, expectations, plans and projections that we believe to be reasonable when made, but which may
change over time. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and inherently involve a wide range of
risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict. Specific risks that could cause actual results to differ materially
from those expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those identified
under “Risk Factors” and other important factors disclosed in this report and from time to time in our other SEC
filings. These risks and uncertainties are amplified by the global macroeconomic, security and political
environments, including inflationary pressures, labor and supply chain challenges, which have caused and will
continue to cause significant challenges, instability and uncertainty. They include:
Industry and Economic Risks
• our dependence on the U.S. government for a substantial portion of our business
NORTHROP GRUMMAN CORPORATION