AI technologies, including GenAI tools, have many potential benefits, such as accelerating and providing insights into data
processing, augmenting human decisionmaking, and optimizing performance for complex systems and tasks. GenAI tools,
for example, are increasingly capable of performing a broad range of tasks, such as text analysis, image generation, and
speech recognition. However, AI systems may perpetuate or amplify biases in the datasets on which they are trained; may not
yet be able to fully explain their decisionmaking; and often depend on such vast amounts of data and other resources that they
are not widely accessible for research, development, and commercialization beyond a handful of technology companies.

Numerous federal laws on AI have been enacted over the past few Congresses, either as standalone legislation or as AIfocused provisions in broader acts. These include the expansive National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020
(Division E of P.L. 116-283), which included the establishment of an American AI Initiative and direction for AI research,
development, and evaluation activities at federal science agencies. Additional acts have directed certain agencies to undertake
activities to guide AI programs and policies across the federal government (e.g., the AI in Government Act of 2020, P.L. 116-
260; and the Advancing American AI Act, Subtitle B of P.L. 117-263). In the 117th Congress, at least 75 bills were
introduced that either focused on AI and ML or had AI/ML-focused provisions. Six of those were enacted. 

In the 118th Congress, as of June 2023, at least 40 bills had been introduced that either focused on AI/ML or contained
AI/ML-focused provisions, and none has been enacted. Collectively, bills in the 118th Congress address a range of topics,
including federal government oversight of AI; training for federal employees; disclosure of AI use; export controls; usespecific prohibitions; and support for the use of AI in particular sectors, such as cybersecurity, weather modeling, wildfire
detection, precision agriculture, and airport safety.

AI technologies have potential applications across a wide range of sectors. A selection of broad,
crosscutting issues with application-specific examples of ongoing congressional interest are
discussed in the CRS report Artificial Intelligence: Background, Selected Issues, and Policy
Considerations.
17 Those issues and examples include implications for the U.S. workforce,
international competition and federal investment in AI R&D, standards development, and ethical
AI—including questions about bias, fairness, and algorithm transparency (for example, in
criminal justice applications).
In addition to those issues and applications, three areas of potential use that may be of growing
interest to Congress—particularly in light of the advances in, and widespread availability of,
GenAI tools—are health care, education, and national security. In other parts of the federal
government, experts have asserted a need to understand the impacts and future directions of AI
applications in these areas. For example, the chief AI officer at the Department of Health and
Human Services, Greg Singleton, at a June 2023 Health Innovation Summit discussed “the role
that AI will play in healthcare, as well as the importance of regulations.”
18 A May 2023
Department of Education report, Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Teaching and Learning,
describes the rising interest in AI in education and highlights reasons to address AI in education
now.19 And the 2023 Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community states, “New
technologies—particularly in the fields of AI and biotechnology—are being developed and are
proliferating faster than companies and governments can shape norms, protect privacy, and
prevent dangerous outcomes.”20 This section will discuss some of the potential benefits and
concerns with the use of AI technologies in these sectors.

Federal laws addressing AI or including AI-focused provisions have been enacted over the past
few Congresses. Arguably the most expansive law was the National Artificial Intelligence
Initiative (NAII) Act of 2020 (Division E of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense
Authorization Act [NDAA] of FY2021, P.L. 116-283). The NAII Act included sections
• codifying the establishment of an American AI Initiative,
• establishing a National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Office to support federal
AI activities,
• establishing an interagency committee at the Office of Science and Technology
Policy to coordinate federal programs and activities in support of the NAII, and
• establishing a National AI Advisory Committee.
The NAII Act further directed AI activities at the National Science Foundation (NSF), National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),40 National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and Department of Energy. Specific provisions include mandating (1) NSF
support for a network of National AI Research Institutes; (2) a National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine study on the current and future impact of AI on the U.S. workforce
across sectors;41 and (3) a task force to investigate the feasibility of, and plan for, a National AI
Research Resource.42
Individual agencies—including the General Services Administration (GSA), the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB), and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)—have also
been statutorily directed to undertake activities to support the use of AI across the federal
government:
• GSA. The AI in Government Act of 2020 (AGA, Division U, Title I, of the
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, P.L. 116-260) created within GSA an AI
Center of Excellence to facilitate the adoption of AI technologies in the federal government and collect and publicly publish information regarding federal
programs, pilots, and other initiatives.43
• OMB. The AGA required OMB to issue a memorandum to federal agencies
regarding the development of AI policies; approaches for removing barriers to
using AI technologies; and best practices for identifying, assessing, and
mitigating any discriminatory impact or bias and any unintended consequences of
using AI. The Advancing American AI Act (Subtitle B of the James M. Inhofe
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023, P.L. 117-263) required
OMB to (1) incorporate additional considerations when developing guidance for
the use of AI in the federal government; (2) develop an initial means to ensure
that contracts for acquiring AI address privacy, civil rights and liberties, and the
protection of government data and information; (3) require the head of each
federal agency (except DOD) to prepare and maintain an inventory of current and
planned AI use cases; and (4) lead a pilot program to initiate four new AI use
case applications to support interagency or intra-agency modernization
initiatives. Additionally, the AI Training Act (P.L. 117-207) required OMB to
establish an AI training program for the acquisition workforce of executive
agencies.
• OPM. The AGA required OPM to establish or update an occupational job series
to include positions with primary duties in AI and to estimate current and future
numbers of federal employment positions related to AI at each agency.
NDAAs have also included provisions focused on AI in the defense, national security, and
intelligence communities each year beginning with the FY2019 John S. McCain NDAA, which
included the first definition of AI in federal statute.44 These provisions have included a focus on
AI development, acquisition, and policies; AI data repositories; recruiting and retaining personnel
in AI; and implementation of recommendations from the 2021 final report of the National
Security Commission on AI.45
Additionally, some enacted legislation has focused on AI R&D or the use of AI in particular
federal programs. For example:
• The CHIPS and Science Act (P.L. 117-167) included numerous AI-related
provisions directing the Department of Energy, NIST, and NSF to support AI and
ML R&D activities and the development of technical standards and guidelines
related to safe and trustworthy AI systems. NSF was further directed to (1)
evaluate the establishment of an AI scholarship-for-service program to recruit
and train AI professionals to support AI work in federal, state, local, and tribal
governments; and (2) study AI research capacity at U.S. institutions of higher
education.