It should be obvious that a broad and deep
investment in the nation’s long-neglected
and now failing infrastructure is necessary
to ensure the United States continues to be a
leading, prosperous democracy among nations.
A sound infrastructure helps us all – individuals,
communities, businesses, and government—
urban and rural. For those of us who have been
long disadvantaged in this nation through
structural racism and discrimination, however,
a sound infrastructure in every community
is especially critical as a bulwark against
the pernicious harms of discrimination and
segregation. Having a solid infrastructure
on which everyone stands helps counter
structural inequities driven by segregation
and longstanding differences in investments in
communities based on race.
Unequal investment is one of two types of
inequities stemming from our historic and
current infrastructure policies and practices.
There is inequity directly via unequal and
inadequate investments in Black communities,
and there is also an indirect inequity because the
harm from failing infrastructure is more severe
for Black communities. Black communities are
disproportionately low-wealth communities,
and people with little wealth commonly lack
the resources to protect themselves and to
recover quickly from disasters resulting from
infrastructure failures. When we fail to make
adequate infrastructure investments, we
subject African Americans to high risks of harm
from infrastructure failures.
This brief provides an overview of the need for a
broad range of infrastructure investments and
provides examples of both types of inequities.
While it focuses on African Americans, it
should be clear that other groups, particularly
Latinos, Native Americans, and low-wealth
individuals, are also disproportionately harmed
by our failure to invest adequately in America’s
infrastructure.
A Comprehensive Approach to Sound
Infrastructure Is an Important Counter
to Historic Racial Inequity
 TMI BRIEFS AUGUST 2021
MORE THAN ROADS AND BRIDGES
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4722017
2 | TMI Brief | More than Roads and Bridges | tminstituteldf.org
When people hear the word “infrastructure,”
they often think of roads and bridges. There
is no question that roads and bridges are
infrastructure, but as civil rights leaders have
urged the nation to recognize, infrastructure
entails far more than just these two things.
Some argue that infrastructure
only encompasses roads,
bridges, tunnels, and railroads
and while those are all vital,
this definition is woefully
inadequate. Infrastructure
includes sewer systems, water
lines, waste facilities, and
telecommunications. It also
includes parks, housing, public
squares, economic centers, and
schools.1
Every four years, the American Society of
Civil Engineers (ASCE) assesses America’s
infrastructure and produces a report card.
ASCE evaluates 17 types of infrastructure and
is beginning to recognize the importance of
broadband.2 Roads and bridges are only two of
the 17. We argue for an even broader conception
of infrastructure than ASCE and recognize that
each form of infrastructure is important to the
future of the United States broadly, but also of
particular importance to African Americans.
We will illustrate this point by focusing on ten
types of infrastructure considered by ASCE and
their relevance for African Americans. We will
also address two types of infrastructure not
evaluated by ACSE: affordable housing and the
care economy.
Roads and Bridges, and a Whole Lot More
 TMI BRIEFS AUGUST 2021
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4722017
3 | TMI Brief | More than Roads and Bridges | tminstituteldf.org
DAMS
ASCE’s current overall rating of America’s
infrastructure is a C-minus.3 A C grade means
that the infrastructure “shows general signs
of deterioration and requires attention.”4 A D
grade means that the infrastructure has “many
elements approaching the end of their service
life.”5 A C-minus grade, therefore, suggests
that much of America’s infrastructure is
deteriorating, and some of it is near the end of
its service life.
ASCE estimates that the country needs to
invest $2.59 trillion over the next ten years to
bring all of the country’s infrastructure to a good
condition.6 This expenditure is an investment
that will contribute to future economic growth
and not an expense that will simply drain our
resources. If we fail to make these investments
by 2039, ASCE estimates that our economy
will lose $10 trillion in GDP, more than three
million jobs, and $2.4 trillion in exports.7
 These
numbers do not account for the lives lost, the
life expectancies reduced, and the suffering
that is caused by poor infrastructure.
AVIATION D+
LEVEES
ENERGY
ROADS
PUBLIC PARKS
INLAND WATERWAYS
SOLID WASTE
TRANSIT
BRIDGES
PORTS
HAZARDOUS WASTE
SCHOOLS
DRINKING WATER
RAIL
DRINKING WATER
STORMWATER
WASTEWATER
C
D
CD+
D
D+
D
C+
DCD+
D
BB
D+
D
D+
SOURCE: ASCE 2021 Report Card for America's Infrastructure
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4722017
4 | TMI Brief | More than Roads and Bridges | tminstituteldf.org
To appreciate the importance of roads and
bridges for African Americans, it is useful to
look at Mississippi, which is the state with the
largest share of African American residents,8
at nearly 40%.9 ASCE gives the nation’s roads
a D grade and the nation’s bridges a C grade.10
Mississippi’s roads and bridges are considerably
worse than the national average, with both rated
D-minus.11
ASCE finds that only 24% of Mississippi’s major
roads and highways are in good condition.
Forty-three percent are in poor condition,
and the remaining 33% are in mediocre or
fair condition.12 Bad roads impose costs
on motorists. For example, in Southaven,
Mississippi, ASCE estimates that damage from
bad roads costs the average driver $1,870
a year.13 This amounts to 6% of the median
household income for Black Mississippians,
and 3% for White residents of the state.14 ASCE
values the lost time due to drivers being stuck
in traffic in Southaven at an additional $1,080
per driver.15
Many Americans would struggle to pay for a
vehicle repair bill of $1,870—or even half as
much.16 For Black Mississippians, who have
lower incomes than both average Americans
and White Mississippians 17 the struggle is likely
to be considerably harder.18 These repair bills
could easily cause lasting damage to Black
households in the state. When people are unable
to use their vehicles, there is considerable
hardship because, for much of America,
Mississippi included, many day-to-day activities
Roads and Bridges: Costly and Unsafe
MISSISSIPPI’S MAJOR ROADS
AND HIGHWAYS CONDITION
24%
43%
33%
GOOD POOR FAIR
 TMI BRIEFS AUGUST 2021
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4722017
5 | TMI Brief | More than Roads and Bridges | tminstituteldf.org
condition, and 9% of them need substantial
repairs.20 Over 400 Mississippi bridges have
been closed because they are unsafe. There
are many weight-restricted bridges that cannot
support a load heavier than a pickup truck.21
As illustrated, roads and bridges are important
to African Americans, but these are not their
only important infrastructure needs.
require access to a private vehicle. The loss of
access to a vehicle could lead to the loss of a
job, the inability to access health care, or the
inability to vote. Individuals might need to turn
to high-interest loans to pay for repairs, leading
to substantial debt. Alternatively, individuals
might be forced to drive an unsafe vehicle and
put their health and the health of others at risk.
There is another health risk from Mississippi’s
bad roads. Mississippi has one of the highest
automotive fatality rates in the country. The
state’s bad roads are implicated in about a third
of the deaths.19
As mentioned above, Mississippi’s bridges also
received a D-minus grade. Among the reasons
Mississippi’s bridges earn such a poor grade is
because only 63% of them are in good condition.
More than a quarter of them (28%) are in fair
MISSISSIPPI’S
BRIDGES HAVE
BEEN CLOSED
BECAUSE THEY
ARE UNSAFE
Lawrence Sawyer/Getty Images
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4722017
6 | TMI Brief | More than Roads and Bridges | tminstituteldf.org
While Black people do not comprise a large
percentage of the population of Texas, by the
numbers, more Black people live in Texas than
in any other state.22 This year, a severe winter
storm shut down the electrical grid in Texas,
causing many people to go without heat and
water for several days.23 This caused a severe
crisis, resulting in almost 200 deaths, including
people freezing to death, dying from carbon
monoxide poisoning when they were forced to
rely on dangerous sources of heat, and people
dying when their medical devices failed, or
they were unable to get life-saving medical
treatment.24 The Houston Chronicle reported
that [t]he deaths come from 57 counties in all
regions of the state but are disproportionately
centered on the Houston area, which at times
during the crisis accounted for nearly half of
all power outages. Of the known ages, races
and ethnicities of the victims, 74 percent were
people of color. Half were at least 65. Six were
children.25
Energy: The Need to Move
Away from Fossil Fuels
 TMI BRIEFS AUGUST 2021
HOUSTON, Feb. 15, 2021 -- A highway is closed due to snow and ice in Houston, Texas, the United States, on Feb. 15, 2021. Up to 2.5 million customers were
without power in the U.S. state of Texas Monday morning as the state's power generation capacity is impacted by an ongoing winter storm brought by
Arctic blast. Photo by Chengyue Lao/Xinhua via Getty Images
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4722017
7 | TMI Brief | More than Roads and Bridges | tminstituteldf.org
The Texas blackout during a severe winter storm
is a foreshadowing of future catastrophes,
as climate change will bring more extreme
weather.26 Power failures have increased by
more than 60% across the nation since 2015.27
A sustained power failure during a heatwave
could be more deadly than one during extremely
cold weather.28 Already, in early June 2021,
the Electric Reliability Council of Texas urged
Texans “to turn down thermostats and cut back
electricity use” after the reserve of available
electricity had shrunk to near critical levels.29
Our energy systems—our engines and our power
plants—mainly rely on fossil fuels that produce
greenhouse gases that lead to climate change.
Climate change causes extreme weather events
that are expected to exceed the capacity of our
infrastructure.30 To address this problem, we
need to move away from fossils fuels to help
limit the damage from climate change,31 and
we need to design our infrastructure with the
awareness that weather that used to be seen as
extreme will be increasingly normal. 32
Climate change will be more harmful to African
Americans. The negative economic impact from
climate change is expected to be most severe
in the Southern United States, where the Black
population is concentrated.33 Additionally, White
Americans have greater wealth to endure natural
disasters stemming from climate change,34 and
the requirements for receiving government
aid in disaster areas are structured in ways
to disproportionately benefit wealthy White
homeowners.35 Consequently, researchers are
finding that natural disasters widen existing
inequalities.36
While there is much damage from climate
change expected in the future, African
Americans have been living with the harm from
the pollution and toxins from burning fossil fuels
for generations. African Americans are more
likely to live near fossil-fuel power plants, and
they are “exposed to 1.5 times as much of the
sooty pollution that comes from burning fossil
fuels as the population at large.”37 Exposure
to fossil-fuel pollutants increases the risk of
preterm births, asthma, cancer, and other
ailments.38 Moving to clean renewable energy
will bring significant health benefits to African
Americans.39
 TMI BRIEFS AUGUST 2021
Climate change
will be more harmful to
African Americans. 