Clinical Trial Phases
 Phase 1 Trials. Phase 1 trials are the first time the product is introduced in human
subjects. These carefully controlled trials typically involve 20 to 80 patients or volunteer
subjects, though the exact numbers may vary depending on the product. Phase 1 trials
generally assess how the product acts in the body and evaluate initial safety (i.e., side
effects). They may also be used to determine the dosing levels to use in phase 2 (e.g., the maximum safe dose or what dose is required to have an effect). Depending on the
product, phase 1 trials may also provide some initial indication as to whether the product
may be effective. In the case of vaccines specifically, phase 1 trials also assess their
ability to provoke an immune response in the body (i.e., immunogenicity).
 Phase 2 Trials. Phase 2 trials continue to assess safety but also evaluate the product’s
effectiveness and common short-term side effects or other risks associated with the
product. Phase 2 trials are also used to determine the optimal dose of the product. For
vaccines, phase 2 assesses how much of the vaccine to administer and on what dosing
schedule (e.g., whether a boost is needed to maximize its effectiveness or whether the
vaccine must be administered on a regular schedule to maintain immunity). As with phase
1 studies, phase 2 studies are carefully controlled. However, phase 2 involves a larger
(though still relatively limited) number of volunteer subjects—generally no more than a
few hundred participants.
 Phase 3 Trials. Phase 3 trials involve an expanded number of participants—from several
hundred to thousands—and are used to assess the product’s safety and effectiveness
across a wide range of patient categories through controlled and uncontrolled studies.
These trials are intended to present a clearer picture of expected risks and benefits under
real-world conditions. The information obtained from phase 3 trials also forms the basis
for the product’s labeling.
Sponsors must generally complete all three phases to obtain FDA approval unless they obtain accelerated
approval, in which case FDA requires post-approval trials to confirm the expected clinical benefit. FDA
may also require, at its discretion, additional clinical trials after approval (i.e., phase 4 trials) for any approved product to continue assessing the product’s safety and effectiveness once on the market.
