What is the Best Purse to Travel With | Shop the Post
 Top: SoCo Vintage (old, similar) // Jeans: Loft (old, similar) // Purse: Coach (old, similar) // Sunglasses: Coach (old,similar) // Purse: kate spade new york (in black)
 

 What is the Best Purse to Travel With | How to Pick
 If there is one accessory I love, it is a good purse. I love how they are practical, but can make an entire outfit look put together. I have a lot of purses...too many probably! But I get a lot out of each one of them.
 

 There are so many different kinds of purses and so many different ways to use them. I will be talking a lot about other purses in later posts, but today I want to talk about the best purses to take when you are traveling. I personally think that a good cross-body bag is the best kind of bag to have when traveling. They are so versatile and they allow you to have your hands free while still storing your necessities in style.
 

 What is the Best Purse to Travel With | My Favorites
 In Turkey, I was touting a Coach Mini Willis cross body. I have this bag in three different colors and it's a great bag for traveling! While it is on the smaller side, it is big enough to hold a small wallet, phone, chapstick and sunglasses. It is perfect for when you are touring a city but don't want to take a lot with you. It's also really nice because you can easily move it to hang in front of you so you can ward off pickpockets!
 

 For my birthday last year, my mom gave me the Michael Kors Large Jet Set Traveler in gray. That is a pretty awesome bag. It fits perfectly into my Michael Kors computer bag so I can throw it in there right before I get on a plane and I can pull it back out when I get off. I love that the color goes with just about anything and it fits a LOT of stuff! The last trip I took it on, I got a wallet, glasses, sunglasses, phone, planner, notebook and some pens in there. I have been really happy with how well it has worn too. The leather isn't my favorite but it has a coating on it that keeps stains and water off.
 

 Here you can glimpse my newest cross-body obsession from kate spade new york. I took this on my recent trip to Jordan and I loved it! It is much bigger than the Coach bag, and has more room in it than the Michael Kors. It also has a zipper pocket that folds down across the top. The leather on this bag is so soft and I love how pink it is. I found this beauty for a steal at a kate spade outlet sale. The entire store was 50% off with an additional 20% bags. It was a great buy! I will keep an eye out for their next outlet sale and make sure I update you all on it!