REVIEW
published: 27 May 2015
doi: 10.3389/fdigh.2015.00002

Social touch in human–computer
interaction
Jan B. F. van Erp 1,2 * and Alexander Toet 1
1

Perceptual and Cognitive Systems, TNO, Soesterberg, Netherlands, 2 Human Media Interaction, University of Twente,
Enschede, Netherlands

Edited by:
Yoram Chisik,
University of Madeira, Portugal
Reviewed by:
Mohamed Chetouani,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
France
Gualtiero Volpe,
Università degli Studi di Genova, Italy
Hongying Meng,
Brunel University London, UK
*Correspondence:
Jan B. F. van Erp,
TNO Human Factors, Kampweg 5,
Soesterberg 3769DE, Netherlands
jan.vanerp@tno.nl
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Human-Media Interaction, a section
of the journal Frontiers in Digital
Humanities
Received: 06 February 2015
Paper pending published:
19 March 2015
Accepted: 08 May 2015
Published: 27 May 2015
Citation:
van Erp JBF and Toet A (2015) Social
touch in human–computer interaction.
Front. Digit. Humanit. 2:2.
doi: 10.3389/fdigh.2015.00002

Touch is our primary non-verbal communication channel for conveying intimate emotions
and as such essential for our physical and emotional wellbeing. In our digital age, human
social interaction is often mediated. However, even though there is increasing evidence
that mediated touch affords affective communication, current communication systems
(such as videoconferencing) still do not support communication through the sense of
touch. As a result, mediated communication does not provide the intense affective
experience of co-located communication. The need for ICT mediated or generated
touch as an intuitive way of social communication is even further emphasized by the
growing interest in the use of touch-enabled agents and robots for healthcare, teaching,
and telepresence applications. Here, we review the important role of social touch in
our daily life and the available evidence that affective touch can be mediated reliably
between humans and between humans and digital agents. We base our observations
on evidence from psychology, computer science, sociology, and neuroscience with
focus on the first two. Our review shows that mediated affective touch can modulate
physiological responses, increase trust and affection, help to establish bonds between
humans and avatars or robots, and initiate pro-social behavior. We argue that ICT
mediated or generated social touch can (a) intensify the perceived social presence of
remote communication partners and (b) enable computer systems to more effectively
convey affective information. However, this research field on the crossroads of ICT and
psychology is still embryonic and we identify several topics that can help to mature the
field in the following areas: establishing an overarching theoretical framework, employing
better research methodologies, developing basic social touch building blocks, and solving
specific ICT challenges.
Keywords: affective touch, mediated touch, social touch, interpersonal touch, human–computer interaction,
human–robot interaction, haptic, tactile

Introduction
Affective Touch in Interpersonal Communication
The sense of touch is the earliest sense to develop in a human embryo (Gottlieb 1971)
and is critical for mammals’ early social development and to grow up healthily (Harlow and
Zimmermann 1959; Montagu 1972). The sense of touch is one of the first mediums of communication between newborns and parents. Interpersonal communication is to a large extent
non-verbal and one of the primary purposes of non-verbal behavior is to communicate emotional states. Non-verbal communication includes facial expressions, prosody, gesture, and touch

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

1

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

(Argyle 1975; Knapp and Hall 2010) of which touch is the primary
modality for conveying intimate emotions (Field 2010; Morrison
et al. 2010; App et al. 2011), for instance, in greetings, in corrections, and in (sexual) relationships. As touch implies direct
physical interaction and co-location, it inherently has the potential
to elicit feelings of social presence. The importance of touch as a
modality in social communication is highlighted by the fact that
the human skin has specific receptors to process affective touch
(“the skin as a social organ”: Morrison et al. 2010) in addition
to those for discriminative touch (Löken et al. 2009; Morrison
et al. 2011; Gordon et al. 2013; McGlone et al. 2014), presumably
like all mammals (Vrontou et al. 2013). ICT systems can employ
human touch for information processing (discriminative touch)
and communication (social touch) as well.

Field (2010) and Gallace and Spence (2010)]. For these reasons,
mediated interpersonal touch is our first topic of interest.
Human–computer interaction applications increasingly deploy
intelligent agents to support the social aspects of the interaction.
Social agents (either embodied or virtual) already employ vision
and audition to communicate social signals but generally lack
touch capabilities. If we look at applications in robots and avatars,
the first applications including touch facilitated information from
user to system only, e.g., in the form of a touch screen or through
specific touch sensors in a tangible interface. Social agents that can
touch the user are of much more recent date. We believe that social
agents could benefit from generating and perceiving social touch
cues (van Erp 2012). Based on studies reviewed in this paper, we
expect that people will feel a closer bond with agents or robots
that use and respond to affective touch since they appear more
human than machine-like and more trustworthy. Touch-enabled
social agents are therefore our second topic of interest.

Discriminative Touch in ICT Systems
Conventional systems for human–computer interaction only
occasionally employ the sense of touch and mainly provide information through vision and audition. One of the first large-scale
applications of a tactile display was the vibration function on
mobile phones, communicating the 1-bit message of an incoming
call, and the number of systems that include the sense of touch
has steadily increased over the past two decades. An important
reason for the sparse use of touch is the supposed low bandwidth of the touch channel (Gallace et al. 2012). Although often
underestimated, our touch sense is very well able to process large
amounts of abstract information. For instance, blind people who
are trained in Braille reading can actually read with their fingertips. This information processing capability is increasingly applied
in our interaction with systems, and more complex information
is being displayed, e.g., to reduce the risk of visual and auditory
overload in car driving, to make us feel more immersed in virtual
environments, or to realistically train and execute certain medical
skills (van Erp and van Veen 2004; Self et al. 2008).

Touch in Social Communication
Social touch can take many forms in our daily lifes such as greetings (shaking hands, embracing, kissing, backslapping, and cheektweaking), in intimate communication (holding hands, cuddling,
stroking, back scratching, massaging), and in corrections (punishment, spank on the bottom). Effects of social touch are apparent
at many levels ranging from physiology to social behavior as we
will discuss in the following sections.
Social touches can elicit a range of strong experiences between
pleasant and unpleasant, depending on among others the stimulus
[e.g., unpleasant pinches evoking pain (nociception)] and location
on the body (e.g., pleasant strokes in erogenous zones). In addition to touch in communication, touch can also be employed in
psychotherapy (Phelan 2009) and nursing (Gleeson and Timmins
2005). Examples range from basic comforting touches and massaging to alternative therapies such as acu-pressure, Reiki, vibroacoustic therapy, and low-frequency vibration (Wigram 1996;
Kvam 1997; Patrick 1999; Puhan et al. 2006; Prisby et al. 2008).
See Dijk et al. (2013) for more examples on mental, healthrelated, and bodily effects of touch. In this paper, we focus on
ICT mediated and generated social touch (the areas where psychology and computer science meet), meaning that areas of, for
instance, Reiki and low-frequency vibration fall outside the scope
of this paper. We first discuss the many roles of social touch in
our daily life before continuing with ICT mediated inter-human
touch and ICT generated and interpreted touch in human–agent
interaction.
In 1990s (Vallbo et al. 1993), the first reports on so-called C
tactile afferents in human hairy skin were published. This neurophysiological channel in the skin reacts to soft, stroking touches,
and its activity strongly depends on stroking speed (with an optimum in the speed range 3–10 cm/s) and has a high correlation
with subjective ratings of the pleasantness of the touch. Research
over the past decades has shown that this system is not involved
in discriminative touch (Olausson et al. 2008) but underlies the
emotional aspects of touch and the development and function of
the social brain (McGlone et al. 2014). Social touches may activate
both this pleasurable touch system and the discriminative touch

Affective Touch in ICT Systems
Incorporating the sense of touch in ICT systems started with
discriminative touch as an information channel, often in addition to vision and audition (touch for information processing).
We believe that we are on the averge of a second transition:
adding social or affective touch to ICT systems (touch for social
communication). In our digital era, an increasing amount of our
social interactions is mediated, for example, through (cell) phones,
video conferencing, text messaging, chat, or e-mail. Substituting
direct contact, these modern technologies make it easy to stay
in contact with distant friends and relatives, and they afford
some degree of affective communication. For instance, an audio
channel can transmit affective information through phonetic features like amplitude variation, pitch inflections, tempo, duration,
filtration, tonality, or rhythm, while a video channel supports nonverbal information such as facial expressions and body gestures.
However, current communication devices do not allow people to
express their emotions through touch and may therefore lack a
convincing experience of actual togetherness (social presence).
This technology-induced touch deprivation may even degrade
the potential beneficial effects of mediated social interaction [for
reviews of the negative side effects of touch deprivation see

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

2

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

system (reacting to, for instance, pressure, vibration, and skin
stretch).

caring, agreement, gratitude, and moral support. Cold feedback
was consistently associated with negative issues.

Touch, Physiological Functioning, and Wellbeing

Touch to Communicate Emotions
Hertenstein et al. (2006, 2009) showed that touch alone can effectively be used to convey distinct emotions such as anger, fear,
and disgust. In addition, touch plays a role in communicating
more complex social messages like trust, receptivity, affection
(Mehrabian 1972; Burgoon 1991) and nurture, dependence, and
affiliation (Argyle 1975). Touch can also enhance the meaning
of other forms of verbal and non-verbal communication, e.g.,
touch amplifies the intensity of emotional displays from our face
and voice (Knapp and Hall 2010). Examples of touches used to
communicate emotions are shaking, pushing, and squeezing to
communicate anger, hugging, patting, and stroking to communicate love (Gallace and Spence 2010). Jones and Yarbrough (1985)
stated that a handshake, an encouraging pat on the back, a sensual
caress, a nudge for attention, a tender kiss, or a gentle brush of the
shoulder can all convey a vitality and immediacy that is at times
far more powerful than language. According to App et al. (2011),
touch is the preferred non-verbal communication channel for
conveying intimate emotions like love and sympathy, confirmed
by, for instance, Debrot et al. (2013) who showed that responsive
touch between romantic partners enhances their affective state.

McCance and Otley (1951) showed that licking and stroking of the
mother animal is critical to start certain physiological processes in
a new-born mammal. This indicates the direct link between skin
stimulation and physiological processes, a link that is preserved
later in life. For instance, gentle stroking touch can lower heart
rate and blood pressure (Grewen et al. 2003), increase transient
sympathetic reflexes and increase pain thresholds (Drescher et al.
1980; Uvnäs-Moberg 1997), and affect the secretion of stress
hormones (Whitcher and Fisher 1979; Shermer 2004; Ditzen et al.
2007). Women holding their partner’s hand showed attenuated
threat-related brain activity in response to mild electric shocks
(Coan et al. 2006) and reported less pain in a cold pressor task
(Master et al. 2009). Touch can also result in coupling or syncing of
electrodermal activity of interacting (romantic) couples (ChatelGoldman et al. 2014). Interpersonal touch is the most commonly
used method of comforting (Dolin and Booth-Butterfield 1993)
and an instrument in nursing care (Bush 2001, Chang 2001,
Henricson et al. 2008). For example, patients who were touched
by a nurse during preoperative instructions experienced lower
subjective and objective stress levels (Whitcher and Fisher 1979),
than people who were not.
In addition to touch affecting hormone levels, hormones
(i.e., oxytocin) also affect the perception of interpersonal touch.
Scheele et al. (2014) investigated the effect of oxytocin on the
perception of a presumed male or female touch on male participants and found that oxytocin increased the rated pleasantness
and brain activity of presumed female touches but not of male
touches (all touches were delivered by the same female experimenter). Ellingsen et al. (2014) reported that after oxytocin submission, the effect of touch on the evaluation of facial expression
increased. In addition, touch (handshaking in particular) can also
play a role in social chemo-signaling. Handshaking can lead to
the exchange of chemicals in sweat and behavioral data indicates
that people more often sniff their hands after a greeting with
a handshake than without a handshake (Frumin et al. 2015).
Many social touches are reciprocal in nature (like cuddling and
holding hands) and their dynamics rely on different mechanisms
all having their own time scale: milliseconds for the detection of
a touch (discriminative touch), hundreds of milliseconds and up
for the experience of pleasurable touch, and seconds and up for
physiological responses (including changes in hormone levels).
How these processes interact and possibly reinforce each other is
still terra incognita.
Physiological responses can also be indirect, i.e., the result of
social or empathetic mechanisms. Cooper et al. (2014) recently
showed that the body temperature of people decreased when
looking at a video of other people putting their hands in cold
water. Another recent paradigm is to use thermal and haptically
enhanced interpersonal speech communication. This showed that
warm and cold signals were used to communicate the valence
of messages (IJzerman and Semin 2009; Suhonen et al. 2012a).
Warm messages were used to emphasize positive feelings and
pleasant experiences, and to express empathy, comfort, closeness,

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

Touch to Elicit Emotions
Not only can the sense of touch be used to communicate distinct
emotions but also to elicit (Suk et al. 2009) and modulate human
emotion. Please note that interpreting communicated emotions
differs from eliciting emotions as the former may be considered
as a cognitive task not resulting in physiological responses, e.g.,
one can perceive a touch as communicating anger without feeling
angry. Starting with the James–Lange theory (James 1884; Cannon
1927; Damasio 1999), the conscious experience of emotion is
the brain’s interpretation of physiological states. The existence of
specific neurophysiological channels for affective touch and pain
and the direct physiological reactions to touch indicate that there
may be a direct link between tactile stimulation, physiological
responses, and emotional experiences. Together with the distinct
somatotopic mapping between bodily tactile sensations and different emotional feelings as found by Nummenmaa et al. (2013),
one may assume that tactile stimulation of different bodily regions
can elicit a wide range of emotions.

Touch as a Behavior Modulator
In addition to communicating and eliciting emotions, touch provides an effective means of influencing people’s attitudes toward
persons, places, or services, their tendency to create bonds and
their (pro-)social behaviors [see Gallace and Spence (2010) for
an excellent overview]. This effect is referred to as the Midas
touch: a brief, casual touch (often at the hand or arm) that is
not necessarily consciously perceived named after king Midas
from Greek mythology who had the ability to turn everything he
touched into gold. For example, a half-second of hand-to-hand
touch from a librarian fostered more favorable impressions of the
library (Fisher et al. 1976), touching by a salesperson increased
positive evaluations of the store (Hornik 1992), and touch can

3

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

also boost the attractiveness ratings of the toucher (Burgoon et al.
1992). Recipients of such “simple” Midas touches are also more
likely to be more compliant or unselfish: willing to participate in
a survey (Guéguen 2002) or to adhere to medication (Guéguen
et al. 2010), volunteering for demonstrating in a course (Guéguen
2004), returning money left in a public phone (Kleinke 1977),
spending more money in a shop (Hornik 1992), tipping more in
a restaurant (Crusco and Wetzel 1984), helping with picking-up
dropped items (Guéguen and Fischer-Lokou 2003), or giving away
a cigarette (Joule and Guéguen 2007). In addition to these oneon-one examples, touch also plays a role in teams. For instance,
physical touch enhances team performance of basketball players
through building cooperation (Kraus et al. 2010). In clinical and
professional situations, interpersonal touch can increase information flow and causes people to evaluate communication partners
more favorably (Fisher et al. 1976).

and Watts 2010; Tsetserukou 2010), pokes (Park et al. 2011),
handholding (Gooch and Watts 2012; Toet et al. 2013), handshakes (Bailenson et al. 2007), strokes on the hand (Eichhorn et al.
2008), arm (Huisman et al. 2013) and cheek (Park et al. 2012),
pinches, tickles (Furukawa et al. 2012), pats (Bonanni et al. 2006),
squeezes (Rantala et al. 2013), thermal signals (Gooch and Watts
2010; Suhonen et al. 2012a,b), massages (Chung et al. 2009), and
intimate sexual touches (Solon 2015).
In addition to direct mediation, there is also an option to use
indirect ways, for instance, through avatars in a virtual world.
Devices like a haptic-jacket system can enhance the communication between users of virtual worlds such as Second Life by
enabling the exchange of touch cues resembling encouraging pats
and comforting hugs between users and their respective avatars
(Hossain et al. 2011). The Huggable is a semi-autonomous robotic
teddy bear equipped with somatic sensors, intended to facilitate
affective haptic communication between two people (Lee et al.
2009) through a tangible rather than a virtual interface. Using
these systems, people can not only exchange messages but also
emotionally and physically feel the social presence of the communication partner (Tsetserukou and Neviarouskaya 2010).
The above examples can be considered demonstrations of the
potential devices and applications and the richness of social touch.
Although it appears that virtual interfaces can effectively transmit
emotion even with touch cues that are extremely degraded (e.g., a
handshake that is lacking grip, temperature, dryness, and texture:
Bailenson et al. 2007), the field lacks rigorous validation and systematic exploration of the critical parameters. The few exceptions
are the work by Smith and MacLean (2007) and by Salminen
et al. (2008). Smith and MacLean performed an extensive study
into the possibilities and the design space of an interpersonal
haptic link and concluded that emotion can indeed be communicated through this medium. Salminen et al. (2008) developed a
friction-based horizontally rotating fingertip stimulator to investigate emotional experiences and behavioral responses to haptic
stimulation and showed that people can rate these kind of stimuli
as less or more unpleasant, arousing, avoidable, and dominating.

Mediated Social Touch
In the previous section, we showed that people communicate
emotions through touch, and that inter-human touch can enhance
wellbeing and modulate behavior. In interpersonal communication, we may use touch more frequently than we are aware of.
Currently, interpersonal communication is often mediated and
given the inherent human need for affective communication,
mediated social interaction should preferably afford the same
affective characteristics as face-to-face communication. However,
despite the social richness of touch and its vital role in human
social interaction, existing communication media still rely on
vision and audition and do not support haptic interaction. For
a more in-depth reflection on the general effects of mediated
interpersonal communication, we refer to Konijn et al. (2008) and
Ledbetter (2014).
Tactile or kinesthetic interfaces in principle enable haptic communication between people who are physically apart, and may
thus provide mediated social touch, with all the physical, emotional, and intellectual feedback it supplies (Cranny-Francis 2011).
Recent experiments show that even simple forms of mediated
touch have the ability to elicit a wide range of distinct affective
feelings (Tsalamlal et al. 2014). This finding has stimulated the
study and design of devices and systems that can communicate,
elicit, enhance, or influence the emotional state of a human by
means of mediated touch.

Remote Collaboration Between Groups
Collaborative virtual environments are increasingly used for distance education [e.g., Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011)], training
simulations [e.g., Dev et al. (2007) and Flowers and Aggarwal
(2014)], therapy treatments (Bohil et al. 2011), and for social
interaction venues (McCall and Blascovich 2009). It has been
shown that adding haptic feedback to the interaction between
users of these environments significantly increases their perceived
social presence (Basdogan et al. 2000; Sallnäs 2010).
Another recent development is telepresence robots that enable
users to physically interact with geographically remote persons
and environments. Their ultimate goal is to provide users with
the illusion of a physical presence in remote places. Telepresence
robots combine physical and remote presence and have a wide
range of potential social applications like remote embodied teleconferencing and teaching, visiting or monitoring elderly in care
centers, and making patient rounds in medical facilities (Kristoffersson et al. 2013). To achieve an illusion of telepresence, the
robot should be able to reciprocate the user’s behavior and to

Remote Communication Between Partners
Intimacy is of central importance in creating and maintaining
strong emotional bonds. Humans have an important social and
personal need to feel connected in order to maintain their interpersonal relationships (Kjeldskov et al. 2004). A large part of their
interpersonal communication is emotional rather than factual
(Kjeldskov et al. 2004).
The vibration function on a mobile phone has been used to
render emotional information for blind users (Réhman and Liu
2010) and a similar interface can convey emotional content in
instant messaging (Shin et al. 2007). Also, a wide range of systems
have been developed for the mediated representation of specific
touch events between dyads such as kisses (Saadatian et al. 2014),
hugs (Mueller et al. 2005; Cha et al. 2008; Teh et al. 2008; Gooch

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

4

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

provide the user with real-time multisensory feedback. As far as
we are aware of, systems including the sense of touch have not been
described yet.

provided by the user to the system, and closing the loop between
these signals.

Generating Social Touch Signals
Lemmens et al. (2009) tested tactile jackets (and later blankets)
to increase emotional experiences while watching movies and
reported quite strong effects of well-designed vibration patterns.
Dijk et al. (2013) developed a dance vest for deaf teenagers. This
vest included an algorithm that translated music into vibration
patterns presented through the vest. Although not generated by a
social entity, experiencing music has a substantial emotional part
as did the automatically generated vibration patterns.
Beyond the scripted and one-way social touch cues employed
in the examples above, human–computer interaction applications
increasingly deploy intelligent agents to support the social aspects
of the interaction (Nijholt 2014). Social agents are used to communicate, express, and perceive emotions, maintain social relationships, interpret natural cues, and develop social competencies
(Fong et al. 2003; Li et al. 2011). Empathic communication in
general may serve to establish and improve affective relations with
social agents (Bickmore and Picard 2005), and may be considered
as a fundamental requirement for social agents that are designed to
function as social companions and therapists (Breazeal 2011). Initial studies have shown that human interaction with social robots
can indeed have therapeutic value (Kanamori et al. 2003; Wada
and Shibata 2007; Robinson et al. 2013). These agents typically use
facial expressions, gesture, and speech to convey affective cues to
the user. Social agents (either physically embodied as, e.g., robots
or represented as on-screen virtual agents) may also use (mediated) touch technology to communicate with humans (Huisman
et al. 2014a). In this case, the touch cue is not only mediated but
also generated and interpreted by an electronic system instead of
a human.
The physical embodiment of robots gives them a direct capability to touch users, while avatars may use the technology designed
for other HCI or mediated social touch applications to virtually
touch their user. Several devices have been proposed that enable
haptic interaction with virtual characters (Hossain et al. 2011;
Rahman and El Saddik 2011; Huisman et al. 2014a). Only few
studies investigated autonomous systems that touch users for
affective or therapeutic purposes (Chen et al. 2011), or that use
touch to communicate the affective state of artificial creatures to
their users (Yohanan and MacLean 2012).

Reactions to Mediated Touch at a Physiological,
Behavioral, and Social Level
Although the field generally lacks serious validation studies, there
is mounting evidence that people use, experience, and react to
direct and mediated social touch in similar ways Bailenson and Yee
(2007), at the physiological, psychological, behavioral, and social
level.
At a physiological and psychological level, mediated affective
touch on the forearm can reduce heart rate of participants that
experienced a sad event (Cabibihan et al. 2012). Mediated touch
affects the quality of a shared experience and increases the intimacy felt toward the other person (Takahashi et al. 2011). Stimulation of someone’s hand through mediated touch can modulate
the quality of a remotely shared experience (e.g., the hilariousness
of a movie) and increase sympathy for the communication partner
(Takahashi et al. 2011). In a storytelling paradigm, participants
experienced a significantly higher degree of connectedness with
the storyteller when the speech was accompanied by remotely
administered squeezes in the upper arm (Wang et al. 2012).
Additional evidence for the potential effects of mediated touch
are found in the fact that hugging a robot medium while talking
increases affective feelings and attraction toward a conversation
partner (Kuwamura et al. 2013; Nakanishi et al. 2013). Participants receiving tactile facial stimulation experienced a stranger
receiving similar stimulation to be closer, more positive and more
similar to themselves when they were provided with synchronous
visual feedback (Paladino et al. 2010).
At a behavioral level, the most important observation is that
the effect of a mediated touch on people’s pro-social behavior is
similar to that of a real touch. According to Haans and IJsselsteijn
(2009a), a virtual Midas touch has effects in the same order of
magnitude as a real Midas touch. At the social level, the use
of mediated touch is only considered appropriate as a means of
communication between people in close personal relationships
(Rantala et al. 2013), and the mere fact that two people are willing
to touch implies an element of trust and mutual understanding
(Collier 1985). The interpretation of mediated touch depends on
the type of interrelationship between sender and receiver (Rantala
et al. 2013), similar to direct touch (Coan et al. 2006; Thompson
and Hampton 2011) and like direct touch, mediated touch communication between strangers can cause discomfort (Smith and
MacLean 2007).

Recognizing and Interpreting Social Touch
Signals
Communication implies a two-way interaction and social robots
and avatars should therefore not only be able to generate but
also to recognize affectionate touches. For instance, robotic affective responses to touch may contribute to people’s quality of life
(Cooney et al. 2014). Touch capability is not only “nice to have”
but may even be a necessity: people expect social interaction with
embodied social agents to the extent that physical embodiment
without tactile interaction results in a negative appraisal of the
robot (Lee et al. 2006). In a recent study on the suitability of social
robots for the wellbeing of the elderly, all participants expressed
their wish for the robot to feel pleasant to hold or stroke and to

Social Touch Generated by ICT Systems
The previous chapter dealt with devices that enable interpersonal
social touch communication, i.e., a situation in which the touch
signals are generated and interpreted by human users and only
mediated through information and communication technology.
One step beyond this is to include social touch in the communication between a user and a virtual entity. This implies
three additional challenges: the generation of social touch signals
from system to user, the interpretation of social touch signals

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

5

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

respond to touch (Hutson et al. 2011). The well-known example of
the pet seal Paro (Wada et al. 2010) shows how powerful a simple
device can be in evoking social touches. Paro responds sec to being
touched but does neither interpret social touch nor produce touch.
Similar effects are reported for touching a humanoid robot on the
shoulder: just being able to touch already significantly increases
trust toward the robot (Dougherty and Scharfe 2011).
Automatic recognition and interpretation of the affective content of human originated social touch is essential to support this
interaction (Argall and Billard 2010). Different approaches to
equipping robots with a sense of touch include covering them
with an artificial skin that simulates the human somatosensory
systems (Dahiya et al. 2010) or the use of fully embodied robots
covered with a range of different (e.g., temperature, proximity,
pressure) sensors (Stiehl et al. 2005). To fully capture a social
touch requires sensors that go beyond those used in the more
advanced area of haptics and that primarily involve discriminative
touch (e.g., contact, pressure, resistance). At least sensors for temperature and soft, stroking touch should be included to capture
important parameters of social touch. However, just equipping
a system (robot, avatar, or interface) with touch sensors is not
sufficient to enable affective haptic interaction. A system can
only appreciate and respond to affective touch in a natural way
when it is able (a) to determine where the touch was applied,
(b) to assess what kind of tactile stimulation was applied, and
(c) to appraise the affective quality of the touch (Nguyen et al.
2007). While video- and audio-based affect recognition have been
widely investigated (Calvo and D’Mello 2010), there have only
been a few studies on touch-based affect recognition. The results
of these preliminary studies indicate that affect recognition based
on tactile interaction between humans and robots is comparable
to that between humans (Naya et al. 1999; Cooney et al. 2012;
Altun and MacLean 2014; Jung et al. 2014; van Wingerden et al.
2014).
Research on capturing emotions from touch input to a computer system (i.e., not in a social context) confirms the potential
of the touch modality (Zacharatos et al. 2014). Several research
groups worked on capturing emotions from traditional computer
input devices like mouse and keyboard based on the assumption
that a user’s emotional state affects the motor output system. A
general finding is that typing speed correlates to valence with
a decrease in typing speed for negative valence and increased
speed for positive valence compared to typing speed in neutral
emotional state (Tsihrintzis et al. 2008; Khanna and Sasikumar
2010). A more informative system includes the force pattern of
the key strokes. Using this information, very high-accuracy rates
(>90%) are reported (Lv et al. 2008) for categorizing six emotional
states (neutral, anger, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise).
This technique requires force sensitive keyboards, which are not
widely available. Touch screens are used by an increasing number of people and offer much richer interaction parameters than
keystrokes such as scrolling, tapping, or stroking. Recent work by
Gao et al. (2012) showed that in a particular game played on the
iPod, touch inputs like stroke length, pressure, and speed were
important features related to a participant’s verbal description of
the emotional experience during the game. Using a linear SVM,
classification performance reached 77% for four emotional classes

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

(excited, relaxed, frustrated, and bored), close to 90% for two levels
of arousal, and close to 85% for two levels of valence.

Closing the Loop
A robot that has the ability to “feel,” “understand,” and “respond”
to touch in a human-like way will be capable of more intuitive and
meaningful interaction with humans. Currently, artificial entities
that include touch capabilities either produce or interpret social
touch, but not both. However, both are required to close the loop
and come to real, bidirectional interaction. The latter may require
strict adherence to, for instance, timing and immediacy; a handshake in which the partners are out-of-phase can be very awkward.
And as Cranny-Francis (2011) states, violating the tactile regime
may result in being rejected as alien and may seriously offend
others.

Reactions to Touching Robots and Avatars at a
Physiological, Behavioral, and Social Level
Although there are still very few studies in this field, and there has
been hardly any real formal evaluation, the first results of touch
interactions with artificial entities appear promising. For instance,
people experience robots that interact by touch as less machinelike (Cramer et al. 2009). Yohanan and colleagues (Yohanan et al.
2005; Yohanan and MacLean 2012) designed several haptic creatures to study a robot’s communication of emotional state and
concluded that participants experienced a broader range of affect
when haptic renderings were applied. Basori et al. (2009) showed
the feasibility of using vibration in combination with sound and
facial expression in avatars to communicate emotion strength.
Touch also assists in building a relationship with social actors:
hand squeezes (delivered through an airbladder) can improve the
relation with a virtual agent (Bickmore et al. 2010). Artificial
hands equipped with synthetic skins can potentially replicate not
only the biomechanical behavior but also the warmth (the “feel”)
of the human hand (Cabibihan et al. 2009, 2010, 2011). Users
perceived a higher degree of friendship and social presence when
interacting with a zoomorphic social robot with a warmer skin
(Park and Lee 2014). Recent experiments indicate that the warmth
of a robotic hand mediating social touch contributed significantly
to the feeling of social presence (Nakanishi et al. 2014) and holding
a warm robot hand increased feelings of friendship and trust
toward a robot (Nie et al. 2012).
Kotranza and colleagues (Kotranza and Lok 2008; Kotranza
et al. 2009) describe a virtual patient as a medical student’s training
tool that is able to be touched and to touch back. These touchenabled virtual patients were treated more like real humans than
virtual patients without touch capabilities (students expressed
more empathy and used touch more frequently to comfort and
reassure the virtual patient).The authors concluded that by adding
haptic interaction to the virtual patient, the bandwidth of the
student-virtual patient communication increases and approaches
that of human–human communication. In a study on the interaction between toddlers and a small humanoid robot, Tanaka
et al. (2007) found that social connectedness correlated with the
amount of touch between the child and robot. In a study where
participants were asked to brush off “dirt” from either virtual
objects or virtual humans, they touched virtual humans with

6

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

less force than non-human objects, and they touched the face
of a virtual human with less force than the torso, while male
virtual humans were touched with more force than female virtual humans (Bailenson and Yee 2008). Huisman et al. (2014b)
performed a study in which participants played a collaborative
augmented reality game together with two virtual agents, visible in
the same augmented reality space. During interaction, one of the
virtual agents touched the user on the arm by means of a vibrotactile display. They found that the touching virtual agent was
rated higher on affective adjectives than the non-touching agent.
Finally, Nakagawa et al. (2011) created a situation in which a robot
requested participants to perform a repetitive monotonous task.
This request was accompanied by an active touch, a passive touch,
or no touch. The result showed that the active touch increased
people’s motivation to continue performing the monotonous task.
This confirms the earlier finding of Haans and IJsselsteijn (2009a)
that the effect of the virtual Midas touch is in the same order of
magnitude as the real Midas touch effect.

may stimulate the further development of mediated social touch
devices. Another research topic is the presumed close link between
social touch and emotions and the potential underlying neurophysiological mechanisms, i.e., the connection between social
touch and the emotional brain.

Multisensory and Contextual Cues
The meaning and appreciation of touch critically depend on its
context (Collier 1985; Camps et al. 2012), such as the relation
between conversation partners (Burgoon et al. 1992; Thompson
and Hampton 2011), the body location of the touch (Nguyen et al.
1975), and the communication partner’s culture (McDaniel and
Andersen 1998). There is no one-to-one correspondence between
a touch and its meaning (Jones and Yarbrough 1985). Hence, the
touch channel should be coupled with other sensory channels
to clarify its meaning (Wang and Quek 2010). An important
research question is which multisensory and contextual cues are
critical. Direct (i.e., unmediated) touch is usually a multisensory
experience: during interpersonal touch, we typically experience
not only tactile stimulation but also changes in warmth along with
verbal and non-verbal visual, auditory, and olfactory signals. Nonverbal cues (when people both see, hear, feel, and possibly smell
their interaction partner performing the touching) may render
mediated haptic technology more transparent, thereby increasing
perceived social presence and enhancing the convincingness or
immediacy of social touch (Haans and IJsselsteijn 2009b, 2010).
Also, since the sight of touch activates brain regions involved in
somatosensory processing [Rolls (2010); even watching a videotaped version: Walker and McGlone (2015)], the addition of visual
feedback may enhance the associated haptic experience. Another
strong cue for physical presence is body warmth. In human social
interaction, physical temperature also plays an important role
in sending interpersonal warmth (trust) information. Thermal
stimuli may therefore serve as a proxy for social presence and
stimulate the establishment of social relationships (IJzerman and
Semin 2010).
In addition to these bottom-up, stimulus driven aspects, topdown factors like expectations/beliefs of the receiver should be
accounted for (e.g., beliefs about the intent of the interaction
partner, familiarity with the partner, affordances of a physically
embodied agent, etc.) since they shape the perceived meaning
of touch (Burgoon and Walther 1990; Gallace and Spence 2010;
Suhonen et al. 2012b).

Research Topics
Mediated social touch is a relatively young field of research
that has the potential to substantially enrich human–human and
human–system interaction. Although it is still not clear to what
extent mediated touch can reproduce real touch, converging evidence seems to show that mediated touch shares important effects
with real touch. However, many studies have an anecdotal character without solid and/or generalizable conclusions and the key
studies in this field have not been replicated yet. This does not necessarily mean that the results are erroneous but it indicates that the
field has not matured enough and may suffer from a publication
bias. We believe that we need advancements in the following four
areas for the field to mature: building an overarching framework,
developing social touch basic building blocks, improving current
research methodologies, and solving specific ICT challenges.

Framework
The human skin in itself is a complex organ able to process many
different stimulus dimensions such as pressure, vibration, stretch,
and temperature (van Erp 2007). “Social touch” is what the brain
makes of these stimulus characteristics (sensations) taking into
account personality, previous experiences, social conventions, the
context, the object or person providing the touch, and probably
many more factors. The scientific domains involved in social
touch each have interesting research questions and answering
them helps the understanding of (real life or mediated) social
touch. In addition, we need an overarching framework to link
the results across disciplines, to foster multidisciplinary research,
and to encourage the transition from exploratory research to
hypothesis driven research.

Social and Cultural
Social touch has a strong (unwritten) etiquette (Cranny-Francis
2011). Important questions are how to develop a touch etiquette
for mediated touch and for social agents that can touch (van
Erp and Toet 2013), and how to incorporate social, cultural, and
individual differences with respect to acceptance and meaning
of a mediated or social agent’s touch. Individual differences may
include gender, attitude toward robots, and technology and touch
receptivity [the (dis-)liking of being touched, Bickmore et al.
2010]. An initial set of guidelines for this etiquette is given by
van Erp and Toet (2013). In addition, we should consider possible
ethical implications of the technology, ranging from affecting
people’s behavior without them being aware of it to the threat of
physical abuse “at a distance.”

Neuroscience
The recent finding that there exists a distinct somatotopic mapping between tactile sensations and different emotional feelings
(Nummenmaa et al. 2013; Walker and McGlone 2015) suggests
that it may also be of interest to determine a map of our responsiveness to interpersonal (mediated) touch across the skin surface (Gallace and Spence 2010). The availability of such a map

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

7

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

Social Touch Building Blocks

Effect Measures

Gallace and Spence (2010) noted that even the most advanced
devices will not be able to deliver something that can approximate
realistic interpersonal touch if we do not know exactly what needs
to be communicated and how to communicate it. Our touch capabilities are very complex, and like mediated vision and audition,
mediated touch will always be degraded compared to real touch.
The question is how this degradation affects the effects aimed for.
A priori, mediated haptic communication should closely resemble non-mediated communication in order to be intuitively processed without introducing ambiguity or increasing the cognitive
load (Rantala et al. 2011). However, the results discussed in this
paper [e.g., Bailenson et al. (2007), Smith and MacLean (2007),
Haans and IJsselsteijn (2009a), Giannopoulos et al. (2011), and
Rantala et al. (2013)] indicate that social touch is quite robust to
degradations and it may not be necessary to mediate all physical
parameters accurately or at all.
However, it is currently not even clear how we can haptically
represent valence and arousal, let alone that we have robust knowledge on which parameters of the rich and complex touch characteristics are crucial in relation to the intended effects. Ideally, we
have a set of building blocks of social touch that can be applied
and combined depending on the situation.

Social touch can evoke effects at many different levels in the
receiver: physiological, psychological, behavioral, and social, and
it is likely that effects at these different levels also interact. For
instance, (social) presence and emotions can reciprocally reinforce each other. Currently, a broad range of effect measures is
applied, which makes it difficult to compare results, assess interactions between levels, and combine experimental results into
an integrated perspective. This pleads for setting a uniform set
of validated and standardized measures that covers the different
levels and that is robust and sensitive to the hypothesized effects of
social touch. This set could include basic physiological measures
known to vary with emotional experience [e.g., heart rate variability and skin conductance; Hogervorst et al. 2014]; psychological
and social measures reflecting trust, proximity, togetherness, and
social presence (IJsselsteijn et al. 2003; Van Bel et al. 2008; van Bel
et al. 2009), and behavioral measures, e.g., quantifying compliance
and performance. Please note though that each set of measures
will have its own pitfalls. For instance, see Brouwer et al. (2015)
for a critical reflection on the use of neurophysiological measures
to assess cognitive or mental state, and Bailenson and Yee (2008)
on the use of self-report questionnaires.

Specific ICT Challenges
Enabling ICT mediated, generated, and/or interpreted social
touch requires specific ICT knowledge and technology. We consider the following issues as most prominent.

Methodology
Not uncommon for research in the embryonic stage, mediated
social touch research is going through a phase of haphazard,
anecdotal studies demonstrating the concept and its’ potential. To
mature, the field needs rigorous replication and methodological
well-designed studies and protocols. The multidisciplinary nature
of the field adds to the diversity in research approaches.

Understanding Social Touches
With a few exceptions, mediated social touch studies are restricted
to producing a social touch and investigate its effects on a user.
To use social touch in interaction means that the system should
not only be able to generate social touches but also to receive
and understand social touches provided by human users. Taken
the richness of human touch into account, this is not trivial.
We may currently not even have the necessary sensor suite to
capture a social touch adequately, including parameters like sheer
and tangential forces, compliance, temperature, skin stretch, etc.
After adequate capturing, algorithms should determine the social
appraisal of the touch. Currently, the first attempts to capture
social touches with different emotional values on a single body
location (e.g., the arm) and to use computer algorithms to classify
them are undertaken (van Wingerden et al. 2014).

Controlled Studies
Only few studies have actually investigated mediated affect
conveyance, and compared mediated with unmediated touch.
Although it appears that mediated social touch can indeed to
some extent convey emotions (Bailenson et al. 2007) and induce
pro-social behavior [e.g., the Midas effect; Haans and IJsselsteijn
(2009a)], it is still not known to what extent it can also elicit strong
affective experiences (Haans and IJsselsteijn 2006) and how this all
compares to real touch or other control conditions.

Context Aware Computing and Social Signal
Processing

Protocols
Previous studies on mediated haptic interpersonal communication mainly investigated the communication of deliberately performed (instructed) rather than naturally occurring emotions
(Bailenson et al. 2007; Smith and MacLean 2007; Rantala et al.
2013). Although this protocol is very time efficient, it relies heavily
on participants’ ability to spontaneously generate social touches
with, for instance, a specific emotional value. This is comparable
to the research domain of facial expression where often trained
actors are used to produce expressions on demand. One may consider training people in producing social touches on demand or
employ a protocol (scenario) that naturally evokes specific social
signals rather than instruct naïve participants to produce them.

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

The meaning of a social touch is highly dependent on the accompanying verbal and non-verbal signals of the sender and the
context in which the touch is applied. An ICT system involved
in social touch interaction should take the relevant parameters
into account, both in generating touch and in interpreting touch.
To understand and manage social signals of a person, the system
is communicating with is the main challenge in the – in itself
relatively young – field of social signal processing (Vinciarelli et al.
2008). Context aware (Schilit et al. 1994) implies that the system
can sense its environment and reason about it in the context of
social touch.

8

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

Current ICT advances like the embodiment of artificial entities,
the development of advanced haptic and tactile display technologies and standards (van Erp et al. 2010, including initial guidelines for mediated social touch: van Erp and Toet 2013) enable
the exploration of new ICT systems that employ this powerful
communication option, for instance, to enhance communication
between physically separated partners and increase trust in and
compliance with artificial entities. There are two prerequisites to
make these applications viable. First, inter-human social touch can
be ICT mediated, and second, social touch can be ICT generated
and understood, all without loss of effectiveness, efficiency, and
user satisfaction.
In this paper, we show that there is converging evidence that
both prerequisites can be met. Mediated social touch shows effects
at aforementioned levels, and these effects resemble those of a
real touch, even if the mediated touch is severely degraded. We
also report the first indications that a social touch can be generated by an artificial entity, although the evidence base is still
small. Moreover, the first steps are taken to develop algorithms
to automatically classify social touches produced by the user.
Our review also shows that (mediated) social touch is an
embryonic field relying for a large part on technology demonstrations with only a few systematic investigations. To advance
the field, we believe the focus should be on the following four
activities: developing an overarching framework (integrating neuroscience, computer science, and social and behavioral science),
developing basic social touch building blocks (based on the critical
social touch parameters), applying stricter research methodologies (use controlled studies, validated protocols, and standard
effect measures), and realizing breakthroughs in ICT (classifying
social touches, context aware computing, social signal processing,
congruence, and enhancing touch cues).
When we are successful in managing these challenges at the
crossroads of ICT and psychology, we believe that (mediated)
social touch can improve our wellbeing and quality of life, can
bridge the gap between real and virtual (social) worlds, and can
make artificial entities more human-like.

Congruency in Time, Space, and Semantics
As with most multimodal interactions, congruency of the signals in space, time, and meaning is of eminent importance. For
instance, touches should be congruent with other (mediated)
display modalities (visual, auditory, olfactory) to communicate
the intended meaning. In addition, congruence in time and space
between, for instance, a seen gesture and a resulting haptic sensation is required to support a common interaction metaphor
based on real touch. It has been shown that combining mediated
social touch with morphologically congruent imagery enhances
perceived social presence, whereas incongruent imagery results in
lower degrees of social presence (Haans and IJsselsteijn 2010).
Especially in closed-loop interaction (e.g., when holding or
shaking hands), signals that are out of sync may severely degrade
the interaction, thus requiring (near) real-time processing of touch
and other social signals and generation of adequate social touches
in reaction.

Enhancing Touch Cues
Social touch seems robust to degradations and mediated touch
does not need to replicate all physical parameters accurately. The
flipside of degradation is enhancement. Future research should
investigate to what extent the affective quality of the mediated
touch signals can be enhanced by the addition of other communication channels or by controlling specific touch parameters. Touch
parameters do not necessarily have to be mediated one-to-one,
but, for instance, temperature and force profiles may be either
amplified or attenuated. The additional options mediation can
provide to social touch have not been explored yet.

Conclusion
Social touch is of eminent importance in inter-human social communication and grounded in specific neurophysiological processing channels. Social touch can have effects at many levels including
physiological (heart rate and hormone levels), psychological (trust
in others), and sociological (pro-social behavior toward others).

In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Technology and
Development (ICCTD ‘09), 416–420. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press.
Bickmore, T.W., Fernando, R., Ring, L., and Schulman, D. 2010. Empathic touch by
relational agents. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 1: 60–71. doi:10.1109/T-AFFC.
2010.4
Bickmore, T.W., and Picard, R.W. 2005. Establishing and maintaining longterm human-computer relationships. ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 12:
293–327. doi:10.1145/1067860.1067867
Bohil, C.J., Alicea, B., and Biocca, F.A. 2011. Virtual reality in neuroscience research
and therapy. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12: 752–62. doi:10.1038/nrn3122
Bonanni, L., Vaucelle, C., Lieberman, J., and Zuckerman, O. 2006. TapTap: a haptic
wearable for asynchronous distributed touch therapy. In Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ‘06, 580–585.
New York, NY: ACM.
Breazeal, C. 2011. Social robots for health applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE
2011 Annual International Conference on Engineering in Medicine and Biology
(EMBC), 5368–5371. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Brouwer, A.-M., Zander, T.O., van Erp, J.B.F., Korteling, J.E., and Bronkhorst,
A.W. 2015. Using neurophysiological signals that reflect cognitive or affective
state: six recommendations to avoid common pitfalls. Front. Neurosci. 9:136.
doi:10.3389/fnins.2015.00136
Burgoon, J.K. 1991. Relational message interpretations of touch, conversational
distance, and posture. J. Nonverbal Behav. 15:233–59. doi:10.1007/BF00986924

References
Altun, K., and MacLean, K.E. 2014. Recognizing affect in human touch of a robot.
Pattern Recognit. Lett. doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2014.10.016
App, B., McIntosh, D.N., Reed, C.L., and Hertenstein, M.J. 2011. Nonverbal channel
use in communication of emotion: how may depend on why. Emotion 11:
603–17. doi:10.1037/a0023164
Argall, B.D., and Billard, A.G. 2010. A survey of tactile human-robot interactions.
Rob. Auton. Syst. 58: 1159–76. doi:10.1016/j.robot.2010.07.002
Argyle, M. 1975. Bodily Communication. 2nd ed. London, UK: Methuen.
Bailenson, J.N., and Yee, N. 2007. Virtual interpersonal touch and digital
chameleons. J. Nonverbal Behav. 31: 225–42. doi:10.1007/s10919-007-0034-6
Bailenson, J.N., and Yee, N. 2008. Virtual interpersonal touch: haptic interaction
and copresence in collaborative virtual environments. Multimed. Tools Appl. 37:
5–14. doi:10.1007/s11042-007-0171-2
Bailenson, J.N., Yee, N., Brave, S., Merget, D., and Koslow, D. 2007. Virtual interpersonal touch: expressing and recognizing emotions through haptic devices. Hum.
Comput. Interact. 22: 325–53. doi:10.1080/07370020701493509
Basdogan, C., Ho, C.-H., Srinivasan, M.A., and Slater, M. 2000. An experimental
study on the role of touch in shared virtual environments. ACM Trans. Comput.
Hum. Interact. 7: 443–60. doi:10.1145/365058.365082
Basori, A.H., Bade, A., Sunar, M.S., Daman, D., and Saari, N. 2009. Haptic vibration
for emotional expression of avatar to enhance the realism of virtual reality.

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

9

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

Burgoon, J.K., and Walther, J.B. 1990. Nonverbal expectancies and the evaluative consequences of violations. Hum. Comm. Res. 17: 232–65. doi:10.1111/j.
1468-2958.1990.tb00232.x
Burgoon, J.K., Walther, J.B., and Baesler, E.J. 1992. Interpretations, evaluations, and
consequences of interpersonal touch. Hum. Comm. Res. 19: 237–63. doi:10.1111/
j.1468-2958.1992.tb00301.x
Bush, E. 2001. The use of human touch to improve the well-being of older adults:
A holistic nursing intervention. J. Holist. Nurs. 19(3):256–270. doi:10.1177/
089801010101900306
Cabibihan, J.-J., Ahmed, I., and Ge, S.S. 2011. Force and motion analyses of the
human patting gesture for robotic social touching. In Proceedings of the 2011
IEEE 5th International Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems (CIS),
165–169. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Cabibihan, J.-J., Jegadeesan, R., Salehi, S., and Ge, S.S. 2010. Synthetic skins with
humanlike warmth. In Social Robotics, Edited by S. Ge, H. Li, J.J. Cabibihan, and
Y. Tan, 362–371. Berlin: Springer.
Cabibihan, J.-J., Pradipta, R., Chew, Y., and Ge, S. 2009. Towards humanlike social
touch for prosthetics and sociable robotics: Handshake experiments and finger
phalange indentations. In Advances in Robotics, Edited by J.H. Kim, S. Ge, P.
Vadakkepat, N. Jesse, A. Al Manum, K. Puthusserypady, et al., 73–79 Berlin:
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-03983-6_11
Cabibihan, J.-J., Zheng, L., and Cher, C.K.T. 2012. Affective tele-touch. In Social
Robotics, Edited by S. Ge, O. Khatib, J.J. Cabibihan, R. Simmons, and M.A.
Williams, 348–356. Berlin: Springer.
Calvo, R.A., and D’Mello, S. 2010. Affect detection: an interdisciplinary review of
models, methods, and their applications. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 1: 18–37.
doi:10.1109/T-AFFC.2010.1
Camps, J., Tuteleers, C., Stouten, J., and Nelissen, J. 2012. A situational touch: how
touch affects people’s decision behavior. Social Influence 8: 237–50. doi:10.1080/
15534510.2012.719479
Cannon, W.B. 1927. The James-Lange theory of emotions: a critical examination
and an alternative theory. Am. J. Psychol. 39: 106–24. doi:10.2307/1415404
Cha, J., Eid, M., Barghout, A., and Rahman, A.M. 2008. HugMe: an interpersonal
haptic communication system. In IEEE International Workshop on Haptic Audio
visual Environments and Games (HAVE 2008), 99–102. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Chang, S.O. 2001. The conceptual structure of physical touch in caring. J. Adv. Nurs.
33(6): 820–827. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2648.2001.01721.x
Chatel-Goldman, J., Congedo, M., Jutten, C., and Schwartz, J.L. 2014. Touch
increases autonomic coupling between romantic partners. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8:95. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00095
Chen, T.L., King, C.-H., Thomaz, A.L., and Kemp, C.C. 2011. Touched by a robot: an
investigation of subjective responses to robot-initiated touch. In Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction HRI ‘11, 457–464.
New York, NY: ACM.
Chung, K., Chiu, C., Xiao, X., and Chi, P.Y.P. 2009. Stress outsourced: a haptic social
network via crowdsourcing. In CHI ‘09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, Edited by D.R. Olsen, K. Hinckley, M. Ringel-Morris,
S. Hudson and S. Greenberg, 2439–2448. New York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/
1520340.1520346
Coan, J.A., Schaefer, H.S., and Davidson, R.J. 2006. Lending a hand: social regulation of the neural response to threat. Psychol. Sci. 17: 1032–9. doi:10.1111/j.
1467-9280.2006.01832.x
Collier, G. 1985. Emotional Expression. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Inc.
Cooney, M.D., Nishio, S., and Ishiguro, H. 2012. Recognizing affection for a touchbased interaction with a humanoid robot. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 1420–1427. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Cooney, M.D., Nishio, S., and Ishiguro, H. 2014. Importance of touch for conveying
affection in a multimodal interaction with a small humanoid robot. Int. J. Hum.
Rob. 12(1): 1550002. doi:10.1142/S0219843615500024
Cooper, E.A., Garlick, J., Featherstone, E., Voon, V., Singer, T., Critchley, H.D.,
et al. 2014. You turn me cold: evidence for temperature contagion. PLoS One
9:e116126. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0116126
Cramer, H., Kemper, N., Amin, A., Wielinga, B., and Evers, V. 2009. “Give me a
hug”: the effects of touch and autonomy on people’s responses to embodied
social agents. Comput. Anim. Virtual Worlds 20: 437–45. doi:10.1002/cav.317
Cranny-Francis, A. 2011. Semefulness: a social semiotics of touch. Soc. Semiotics 21:
463–81. doi:10.1080/10350330.2011.591993

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

Crusco, A.H., and Wetzel, C.G. 1984. The midas touch: the effects of interpersonal touch on restaurant tipping. Pers. Soc. Psychol. B 10: 512–7. doi:10.1177/
0146167284104003
Dahiya, R.S., Metta, G., Valle, M., and Sandini, G. 2010. Tactile sensing – from
humans to humanoids. IEEE Trans. Rob. 26: 1–20. doi:10.1109/TRO.2009.
2033627
Damasio, A. 1999. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making
of Consciousness. London, UK: Heinemann.
Debrot, A., Schoebi, D., Perrez, M., and Horn, A.B. 2013. Touch as an interpersonal emotion regulation process in couples’ daily lives: the mediating
role of psychological intimacy. Pers. Soc. Psychol. B 39: 1373–85. doi:10.1177/
0146167213497592
Dev, P., Youngblood, P., Heinrichs, W.L., and Kusumoto, L. 2007. Virtual worlds
and team training. Anesthesiol. Clin. 25: 321–36. doi:10.1016/j.anclin.2007.03.
001
Dijk, E.O., Nijholt, A., van Erp, J.B.F., Wolferen, G.V., and Kuyper, E. 2013. Audiotactile stimulation: a tool to improve health and well-being? Int. J. Auton. Adapt.
Commun. Syst. 6: 305–23. doi:10.1504/IJAACS.2013.056818
Ditzen, B., Neumann, I.D., Bodenmann, G., von Dawans, B., Turner, R.A., Ehlert,
U., et al. 2007. Effects of different kinds of couple interaction on cortisol and
heart rate responses to stress in women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 32: 565–74.
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2007.03.011
Dolin, D.J., and Booth-Butterfield, M. 1993. Reach out and touch someone: analysis of nonverbal comforting responses. Commun. Q. 41: 383–93. doi:10.1080/
01463379309369899
Dougherty, E., and Scharfe, H. 2011. Initial formation of trust: designing an interaction with geminoid-DK to promote a positive attitude for cooperation. In
Social Robotics, Edited by B. Mutlu, C. Bartneck, J. Ham, V. Evers, and T. Kanda,
95–103. Berlin: Springer.
Drescher, V.M., Gantt, W.H., and Whitehead, W.E. 1980. Heart rate response to
touch. Psychosom. Med. 42: 559–65. doi:10.1097/00006842-198011000-00004
Eichhorn, E., Wettach, R., and Hornecker, E. 2008. A stroking device for spatially
separated couples. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Human
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services Mobile HCI ‘08, 303–306.
New York, NY: ACM.
Ellingsen, D.M., Wessberg, J., Chelnokova, O., Olausson, H., Aeng, B., and Eknes,
S. 2014. In touch with your emotions: oxytocin and touch change social impressions while others’ facial expressions can alter touch. Psychoneuroendocrinology
39: 11–20. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.09.017
Field, T. 2010. Touch for socioemotional and physical well-being: a review. Dev. Rev.
30: 367–83. doi:10.1016/j.dr.2011.01.001
Fisher, J.D., Rytting, M., and Heslin, R. 1976. Hands touching hands: affective and
evaluative effects of an interpersonal touch. Sociometry 39: 416–21. doi:10.2307/
3033506
Flowers, M.G., and Aggarwal, R. 2014. Second LifeTM : a novel simulation platform
for the training of surgical residents. Expert Rev. Med. Devices 11: 101–3. doi:10.
1586/17434440.2014.863706
Fong, T., Nourbakhsh, I., and Dautenhahn, K. 2003. A survey of socially
interactive robots. Rob. Auton. Syst. 42: 143–66. doi:10.1016/S0921-8890(02)
00372-X
Frumin, I., Perl, O., Endevelt-Shapira, Y., Eisen, A., Eshel, N., Heller, I., et al.
2015. A social chemosignaling function for human handshaking. Elife 4: e05154.
doi:10.7554/eLife.05154
Furukawa, M., Kajimoto, H., and Tachi, S. 2012. KUSUGURI: a shared tactile
interface for bidirectional tickling. In Proceedings of the 3rd Augmented Human
International Conference AH ‘12, 1–8. New York, NY: ACM.
Gallace, A., Ngo, M.K., Sulaitis, J., and Spence, C. 2012. Multisensory presence in
virtual reality: possibilities & limitations. In Multiple Sensorial Media Advances
and Applications: New Developments in MulSeMedia, Edited by G. Ghinea, F.
Andres and S.R. Gulliver, 1–40. Vancouver, BC: IGI Global.
Gallace, A., and Spence, C. 2010. The science of interpersonal touch: an overview.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34: 246–59. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2008.10.004
Gao, Y., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., and Meng, H. 2012. What does touch tell us about
emotions in touchscreen-based gameplay? ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact.
19: 1–30. doi:10.1145/2395131.2395138
Giannopoulos, E., Wang, Z., Peer, A., Buss, M., and Slater, M. 2011. Comparison of
people’s responses to real and virtual handshakes within a virtual environment.
Brain Res. Bull. 85: 276–82. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.11.012

10

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

Gleeson, M., and Timmins, F. 2005. A review of the use and clinical effectiveness of
touch as a nursing intervention. Clin. Effect. Nurs. 9: 69–77. doi:10.1016/j.cein.
2004.12.002
Gooch, D., and Watts, L. 2010. Communicating social presence through thermal
hugs. In Proceedings of First Workshop on Social Interaction in Spatially Separated
Environments (SISSI2010), Edited by F. Schmid, T. Hesselmann, S. Boll, K.
Cheverst, and L. Kulik, 11–19. Copenhagen: International Society for Presence
Research.
Gooch, D., and Watts, L. 2012. Yourgloves, hothands and hotmits: devices to hold
hands at a distance. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology UIST ‘12, 157–166. New York, NY: ACM.
Gordon, I., Voos, A.C., Bennett, R.H., Bolling, D.Z., Pelphrey, K.A. and Kaiser,
M.D. 2013. Brain mechanisms for processing affective touch. Hum. Brain Mapp.
34(4):914–922. doi:10.1002/hbm.21480
Gottlieb, G. 1971. Ontogenesis of sensory function in birds and mammals. In The
Biopsychology of Development, Edited by E. Tobach, L.R. Aronson, and E. Shaw,
67–128. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Grewen, K.M., Anderson, B.J., Girdler, S.S., and Light, K.C. 2003. Warm partner
contact is related to lower cardiovascular reactivity. Behav. Med. 29: 123–30.
doi:10.1080/08964280309596065
Guéguen, N. 2002. Touch, awraness of touch, and compliance with a request.
Percept. Mot. Skills 95: 355–60. doi:10.2466/pms.2002.95.2.355
Guéguen, N. 2004. Nonverbal encouragement of participation in a course: the effect
of touching. Soc. Psychol. Educ. 7: 89–98. doi:10.1023/B:SPOE.0000010691.
30834.14
Guéguen, N., and Fischer-Lokou, J. 2003. Tactile contact and spontaneous help:
an evaluation in a natural setting. J. Soc. Psychol. 143: 785–7. doi:10.1080/
00224540309600431
Guéguen, N., Meineri, S., and Charles-Sire, V. 2010. Improving medication adherence by using practitioner nonverbal techniques: a field experiment on the effect
of touch. J. Behav. Med. 33: 466–73. doi:10.1007/s10865-010-9277-5
Haans, A., and IJsselsteijn, W.A. 2006. Mediated social touch: a review of current research and future directions. Virtual Reality 9: 149–59. doi:10.1007/
s10055-005-0014-2
Haans, A., and IJsselsteijn, W.A. (2009a). The virtual Midas Touch: helping behavior
after a mediated social touch. IEEE Trans. Haptics 2: 136–40. doi:10.1109/TOH.
2009.20
Haans, A., and IJsselsteijn, W.A. (2009b). I’m always touched by your presence, dear:
combining mediated social touch with morphologically correct visual feedback.
In Proceedings of Presence 2009, 1–6. Los Angeles, CA: International Society for
Presence Research.
Haans, A., and IJsselsteijn, W.A. 2010. Combining mediated social touch with
vision: from self-attribution to telepresence? In Proceedings of Special Symposium
at EuroHaptics 2010: Haptic and Audio-Visual Stimuli: Enhancing Experiences
and Interaction, Edited by A. Nijholt, E.O. Dijk, and P.M.C. Lemmens, 35–46
Enschede:University of Twente.
Henricson, M., Ersson, A., Määttä, S., Segesten, K., and Berglund, A.L. 2008. The
outcome of tactile touch on stress parameters in intensive care: A randomized
controlled trial. Complement. Ther. Clin. Prac. 14(4): 244–254.
Harlow, H.F., and Zimmermann, R.R. 1959. Affectional responses in the infant
monkey; orphaned baby monkeys develop a strong and persistent attachment
to inanimate surrogate mothers. Science 130: 421–32. doi:10.1126/science.130.
3373.421
Hertenstein, M.J., Holmes, R., McCullough, M., and Keltner, D. 2009. The communication of emotion via touch. Emotion 9: 566–73. doi:10.1037/a0016108
Hertenstein, M.J., Keltner, D., App, B., Bulleit, B.A., and Jaskolka, A.R. 2006. Touch
communicates distinct emotions. Emotion 6: 528–33. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.6.
3.528
Hogervorst, M.A., Brouwer, A.-M., and van Erp, J.B.F. 2014. Combining and comparing EEG, peripheral physiology and eye-related measures for the assessment
of mental workload. Front. Neurosci. 8:322. doi:10.3389/fnins.2014.00322
Hornik, J. 1992. Tactile stimulation and consumer response. J. Consum. Res. 19:
449–58. doi:10.1086/209314
Hossain, S.K.A., Rahman, A.S.M.M., and El Saddik, A. 2011. Measurements of
multimodal approach to haptic interaction in second life interpersonal communication system. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 60: 3547–58. doi:10.1109/TIM.
2011.2161148
Huisman, G., Bruijnes, M., Kolkmeier, J., Jung, M.M., Darriba Frederiks, A., and
Rybarczyk, Y. (2014a). Touching virtual agents: embodiment and mind. In
Innovative and Creative Developments in Multimodal Interaction Systems, Edited

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

by Y. Rybarczyk, T. Cardoso, J. Rosas, and L. Camarinha-Matos, 114–138.
Berlin: Springer.
Huisman, G., Kolkmeier, J., and Heylen, D. (2014b). Simulated social touch in a collaborative game. In Haptics: Neuroscience, Devices, Modeling, and Applications,
Edited by M. Auvray and C. Duriez, 248–256. Berlin: Springer.
Huisman, G., Darriba Frederiks, A., Van Dijk, E.M.A.G., Kröse, B.J.A., and Heylen,
D.K.J. 2013. Self touch to touch others: designing the tactile sleeve for social
touch. In Online Proceedings of TEI’13. Available at: http://www.tei-conf.org/13/
sites/default/files/page-files/Huisman.pdf
Hutson, S., Lim, S., Bentley, P.J., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., and Bowling, A. 2011.
Investigating the suitability of social robots for the wellbeing of the elderly. In
Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, Edited by S. D’Mello, A. Graesser,
B. Schuller, and J.C. Martin, 578–587. Berlin: Springer.
IJsselsteijn, W.A., van Baren, J., and van Lanen, F. 2003. Staying in touch: social
presence and connectedness through synchronous and asynchronous communication media (Part III). In Human-Computer Interaction: Theory and Practice,
Edited by C. Stephanidis and J. Jacko, 924–928. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
IJzerman, H., and Semin, G.R. 2009. The thermometer of social relations: mapping social proximity on temperature. Psychol. Sci. 20: 1214–20. doi:10.1111/j.
1467-9280.2009.02434.x
IJzerman, H., and Semin, G.R. 2010. Temperature perceptions as a ground for social
proximity. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 46: 867–73. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2010.07.015
James, W. 1884. What is an emotion? Mind 9: 188–205. doi:10.1093/mind/os-IX.
34.188
Jones, S.E., and Yarbrough, A.E. 1985. A naturalistic study of the meanings of touch.
Comm. Monogr. 52: 19–56. doi:10.1080/03637758509376094
Joule, R.V., and Guéguen, N. 2007. Touch, compliance, and awareness of tactile
contact. Percept. Mot. Skills 104: 581–8. doi:10.2466/pms.104.2.581-588
Jung, M.M., Poppe, R., Poel, M., and Heylen, D.K.J. 2014. Touching the VOID –
introducing CoST: corpus of social touch. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI ‘14), 120–127. New York, NY:
ACM.
Kanamori, M., Suzuki, M., Oshiro, H., Tanaka, M., Inoguchi, T., Takasugi, H.,
et al. 2003. Pilot study on improvement of quality of life among elderly using
a pet-type robot. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation, 107–112. Piscataway, NJ:
IEEE.
Khanna, P., and Sasikumar, M. 2010. Recognising emotions from keyboard stroke
pattern. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 11: 1–5. doi:10.5120/1614-2170
Kjeldskov, J., Gibbs, M., Vetere, F., Howard, S., Pedell, S., Mecoles, K., et al. 2004.
Using cultural probes to explore mediated intimacy. Australas J. Inf. Syst. 11.
Available at: http://journal.acs.org.au/index.php/ajis/article/view/128
Kleinke, C.L. 1977. Compliance to requests made by gazing and touching experimenters in field settings. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 13: 218–23. doi:10.1016/
0022-1031(77)90044-0
Knapp, M.L., and Hall, J.A. 2010. Nonverbal Communication in Human Interaction
(7th ed.). Boston, MA: Wadsworth, CENGAGE Learning.
Konijn, E.A., Utz, S., Tanis, M., and Barnes, S.B. 2008. Mediated Interpersonal
Communication. New York, NY: Routledge.
Kotranza, A., and Lok, B. 2008. Virtual human + tangible interface = mixed reality
human: an initial exploration with a virtual breast exam patient. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Virtual Reality Conference 2008 (VR ‘08), 99–106. Piscataway, NJ:
IEEE.
Kotranza, A., Lok, B., Deladisma, A., Pugh, C.M., and Lind, D.S. 2009. Mixed
reality humans: evaluating behavior, usability, and acceptability. IEEE Trans. Vis.
Comput. Graph. 15: 369–82. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2008.195
Kraus, M.W., Huang, C., and Keltner, D. 2010. Tactile communication, cooperation,
and performance: an ethological study of the NBA. Emotion 10: 745–9. doi:10.
1037/a0019382
Kristoffersson, A., Coradeschi, S., and Loutfi, A. 2013. A review of mobile
robotic telepresence. Adv. Hum. Comput. Int. 2013: 1–17. doi:10.1155/2013/
902316
Kuwamura, K., Sakai, K., Minato, T., Nishio, S., and Ishiguro, H. 2013. Hugvie: a
medium that fosters love. In The 22nd IEEE International Symposium on Robot
and Human Interactive Communication, 70–75. Gyeongju: IEEE.
Kvam, M.H. 1997. The effect of vibroacoustic therapy. Physiotherapy 83: 290–5.
doi:10.1016/S0031-9406(05)66176-7
Ledbetter, A.M. 2014. The past and future of technology in interpersonal communication theory and research. Commun. Stud. 65: 456–9. doi:10.1080/10510974.
2014.927298

11

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

Lee, J.K., Stiehl, W.D., Toscano, R.L., and Breazeal, C. 2009. Semi-autonomous robot
avatar as a medium for family communication and education. Adv. Rob. 23:
1925–49. doi:10.1163/016918609X12518783330324
Lee, K.M., Jung, Y., Kim, J., and Kim, S.R. 2006. Are physically embodied social
agents better than disembodied social agents? The effects of physical embodiment, tactile interaction, and people’s loneliness in human-robot interaction.
Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 64: 962–73. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.05.002
Lemmens, P., Crompvoets, F., Brokken, D., van den Eerenbeemd, J., and de
Vries, G.J. 2009. A body-conforming tactile jacket to enrich movie viewing. In
EuroHaptics Conference, 2009 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual
Environment and Teleoperator Systems. World Haptics 2009. Third Joint, 7–12.
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press.
Li, H., Cabibihan, J.-J., and Tan, Y. 2011. Towards an effective design of social robots.
Int. J. Soc. Rob. 3: 333–5. doi:10.1007/s12369-011-0121-z
Löken, L.S., Wessberg, J., Morrison, I., McGlone, F., and Olausson, H. 2009. Coding
of pleasant touch by unmyelinated afferents in humans. Nat. Neurosci. 12(5):
547–548. doi:10.1038/nn.2312
Lv, H.-R., Lin, Z.-L., Yin, W.-J., and Dong, J. 2008. Emotion recognition based on
pressure sensor keyboards. In IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and
Expo 2008, 1089–1092. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Master, S.L., Eisenberger, N.I., Taylor, S.E., Naliboff, B.D., Shirinyan, D., and Lieberman, M.D. 2009. A picture’s worth: partner photographs reduce experimentally
induced pain. Psychol. Sci. 20: 1316–8. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02444.x
McCall, C., and Blascovich, J. 2009. How, when, and why to use digital experimental
virtual environments to study social behavior. Soc. Pers. Psychol. Compass 3:
744–58. doi:10.1111/j.1751-9004.2009.00195.x
McCance, R.A., and Otley, M. 1951. Course of the blood urea in newborn rats, pigs
and kittens. J. Physiol. 113: 18–22. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1951.sp004552
McDaniel, E., and Andersen, P.A. 1998. International patterns of interpersonal
tactile communication: a field study. J. Nonverbal Behav. 22: 59–75. doi:10.1023/
A:1022952509743
McGlone, F., Wessberg, J., and Olausson, H. 2014. Discriminative and affective touch: sensing and feeling. Neuron 82: 737–55. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.
05.001
Mehrabian, A. 1972. Nonverbal Communication. Chicago, IL: Aldine-Atherton.
Mikropoulos, T.A., and Natsis, A. 2011. Educational virtual environments: a tenyear review of empirical research (1999-2009). Comput. Educ. 56: 769–80. doi:10.
1016/j.compedu.2010.10.020
Montagu, A. 1972. Touching: The Human Significance of the Skin. New York, NY:
Harper & Row Publishers.
Morrison, I., Löken, L., and Olausson, H. 2010. The skin as a social organ. Exp. Brain
Res. 204: 305–14. doi:10.1007/s00221-009-2007-y
Morrison, I., Björnsdotter, M., and Olausson, H. 2011. Vicarious responses to
social touch in posterior insular cortex are tuned to pleasant caressing speeds.
J. Neurosci. 31(26):9554–9562.
Mueller, F., Vetere, F., Gibbs, M.R., Kjeldskov, J., Pedell, S., and Howard, S. 2005.
Hug over a distance. In CHI ‘05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, Edited by G. van der Veer and C. Gale, 1673–1676. New
York, NY: ACM. doi:10.1145/1056808.1056994
Nakagawa, K., Shiomi, M., Shinozawa, K., Matsumura, R., Ishiguro, H., and
Hagita, N. 2011. Effect of robot’s active touch on people’s motivation. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction HRI
‘11, 465–472. New York, NY: ACM.
Nakanishi, H., Tanaka, K., and Wada, Y. 2014. Remote handshaking: touch enhances
video-mediated social telepresence. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI’14, 2143–2152. New York, NY: ACM.
Nakanishi, J., Kuwamura, K., Minato, T., Nishio, S., and Ishiguro, H. 2013. Evoking
affection for a communication partner by a robotic communication medium. In
The First International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction (iHAI 2013), 1–8.
Available at: http://hai-conference.net/ihai2013/proceedings/pdf/III-1-4.pdf
Naya, F., Yamato, J., and Shinozawa, K. 1999. Recognizing human touching behaviors using a haptic interface for a pet-robot. In Conference Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (IEEE SMC ‘99),
1030–1034. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Nguyen, N., Wachsmuth, I., and Kopp, S. 2007. Touch perception and emotional
appraisal for a virtual agent. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop Emotion and
Computing-Current Research and Future Impact, Edited by D. Reichardt and
P. Levi, 17–22. Stuttgart: Berufsakademie Stuttgart.

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

Nguyen, T., Heslin, R., and Nguyen, M.L. 1975. The meanings of
touch: sex differences. J. Commun. 25: 92–103. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.
1975.tb00610.x
Nie, J., Park, M., Marin, A.L., and Sundar, S.S. 2012. Can you hold my hand? Physical
warmth in human-robot interaction. In Proceeedings of the 7th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 201–202. Piscataway,
NJ: IEEE.
Nijholt, A. 2014. Breaking fresh ground in human-media interaction research.
Front. ICT 1:4. doi:10.3389/fict.2014.00004
Nummenmaa, L., Glerean, E., Hari, R., and Hietanen, J.K. 2013. Bodily maps
of emotions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111: 646–51. doi:10.1073/pnas.
1321664111
Olausson, H.W., Cole, J., Vallbo, Å, McGlone, F., Elam, M., Krämer, H.H., et al. 2008.
Unmyelinated tactile afferents have opposite effects on insular and somatosensory cortical processing. Neurosci. Lett. 436: 128–32. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2008.
03.015
Paladino, M.P., Mazzurega, M., Pavani, F., and Schubert, T.W. 2010. Synchronous
multisensory stimulation blurs self-other boundaries. Psychol. Sci. 21: 1202–7.
doi:10.1177/0956797610379234
Park, E., and Lee, J. 2014. I am a warm robot: the effects of temperature
in physical human – robot interaction. Robotica 32: 133–42. doi:10.1017/
S026357471300074X
Park, Y.W., Bae, S.H., and Nam, T.J. 2012. How do Couples Use CheekTouch Over
Phone Calls? New York, NY: ACM. 763–6.
Park, Y.W., Hwang, S., and Nam, T.J. 2011. Poke: emotional touch delivery through
an inflatable surface over interpersonal mobile communications. In Adjunct
Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium Adjunct on User Interface
Software and Technology UIST ‘11, 61–62. New York, NY: ACM.
Patrick, G. 1999. The effects of vibroacoustic music on symptom reduction. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 18: 97–100. doi:10.1109/51.752987
Phelan, J.E. 2009. Exploring the use of touch in the psychotherapeutic setting: a phenomenological review. Psychotherapy (Chic) 46: 97–111. doi:10.1037/a0014751
Prisby, R.D., Lafage-Proust, M.-H., Malaval, L., Belli, A., and Vico, L. 2008. Effects
of whole body vibration on the skeleton and other organ systems in man and
animal models: what we know and what we need to know. Ageing Res. Rev. 7:
319–29. doi:10.1016/j.arr.2008.07.004
Puhan, M.A., Suarez, A., Cascio, C.L., Zahn, A., Heitz, M., and Braendli, O. 2006.
Didgeridoo playing as alternative treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 332: 266–70. doi:10.1136/bmj.38705.
470590.55
Rahman, A.S.M.M., and El Saddik, A. 2011. HKiss: real world based haptic interaction with virtual 3D avatars. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME), 1–6. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Rantala, J., Raisamo, R., Lylykangas, J., Ahmaniemi, T., Raisamo, J., Rantala, J., et al.
2011. The role of gesture types and spatial feedback in haptic communication.
IEEE Trans. Haptics 4: 295–306. doi:10.1109/TOH.2011.4
Rantala, J., Salminen, K., Raisamo, R., and Surakka, V. 2013. Touch gestures in
communicating emotional intention via vibrotactile stimulation. Int. J. Hum.
Comput. Stud. 7: 679–90. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2013.02.004
Réhman, S., and Liu, L. 2010. iFeeling: vibrotactile rendering of human emotions on
mobile phones. In Mobile Multimedia Processing, Edited by X. Jiang, M.Y. Ma,
and C. Chen, 1–20. Berlin: Springer.
Robinson, H., MacDonald, B., Kerse, N., and Broadbent, E. 2013. The psychosocial
effects of a companion robot: a randomized controlled trial. J. Am. Med. Dir.
Assoc. 14: 661–7. doi:10.1016/j.jamda.2013.02.007
Rolls, E.T. 2010. The affective and cognitive processing of touch, oral texture, and
temperature in the brain. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34: 237–45. doi:10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2008.03.010
Saadatian, E., Samani, H., Parsani, R., Pandey, A.V., Li, J., Tejada, L., et al. 2014.
Mediating intimacy in long-distance relationships using kiss messaging. Int. J.
Hum. Comput. Stud. 72: 736–46. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2014.05.004
Sallnäs, E.L. 2010. Haptic feedback increases perceived social presence. In Haptics:
Generating and Perceiving Tangible Sensations, Part II, Edited by A.M. Kappers,
J.B. Erp, W.M. Bergmann Tiest, and F.C. Helm, 178–185. Berlin: Springer.
Salminen, K., Surakka, V., Lylykangas, J., Raisamo, R., Saarinen, R., Raisamo,
R., et al. 2008. Emotional and behavioral responses to haptic stimulation. In
Proceeding of the Twenty-Sixth Annual SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, 1555–1562. New York, NY: ACM Press.

12

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

Scheele, D., Kendrick, K.M., Khouri, C., Kretzer, E., Schläpfer, T.E., StoffelWagner, B., et al. 2014. An oxytocin-induced facilitation of neural and emotional
responses to social touch correlates inversely with autism traits. Neuropsychopharmacology 39: 2078–85. doi:10.1038/npp.2014.78
Schilit, B., Adams, N., and Want, R. 1994. Context-aware computing applications. In
First Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications (WMCSA 1994),
85–90. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Self, B.P., van Erp, J.B.F., Eriksson, L., and Elliott, L.R. 2008. Human factors issues
of tactile displays for military environments. In Tactile Displays for Navigation,
Orientation and Communication in Military Environments, Edited by J.B.F. van
Erp and B.P. Self, 3. Neuillu-sur-Seine: NATO RTO.
Shermer, M. 2004. A bounty of science. Sci. Am. 290: 33. doi:10.1038/
scientificamerican0204-33
Shin, H., Lee, J., Park, J., Kim, Y., Oh, H., and Lee, T. 2007. A tactile emotional
interface for instant messenger chat. In Proceedings of the 2007 Conference
on Human Interface, Edited by M.J. Smith and G. Salvendy, 166–175. Berlin:
Springer.
Smith, J., and MacLean, K. 2007. Communicating emotion through a haptic link:
design space and methodology. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 65: 376–87. doi:10.
1016/j.ijhcs.2006.11.006
Solon, O. 2015. These sex tech toys will blow your mind. WIRED. Available at:
http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2014-06/27/sex-tech
Stiehl, W.D., Lieberman, J., Breazeal, C., Basel, L., Lalla, L., and Wolf, M. 2005.
Design of a therapeutic robotic companion for relational, affective touch. In
IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication
(ROMAN 2005), 408–415. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE.
Suhonen, K., Müller, S., Rantala, J., Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K., Raisamo, R., and
Lantz, V. (2012a). Haptically augmented remote speech communication: a study
of user practices and experiences. In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design NordiCHI ‘12,
361–369. New York, NY: ACM.
Suhonen, K., Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K., and Mäkelä, K. (2012b). User experiences and expectations of vibrotactile, thermal and squeeze feedback in interpersonal communication. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual BCS Interaction
Specialist Group Conference on People and Computers BCS-HCI ‘12, 205–214.
New York, NY: ACM.
Suk, H.-J., Jeong, S.-H., Hang, T.-H., and Kwon, D.-S. 2009. Tactile sensation as
emotion elicitor. Kansei Eng. Int. 8(2): 147–52.
Takahashi, K., Mitsuhashi, H., Murata, K., Norieda, S., and Watanabe, K. 2011.
Improving shared experiences by haptic telecommunication. In 2011 International Conference on Biometrics and Kansei Engineering (ICBAKE), 210–215. Los
Alamitos, CA: IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICBAKE.2011.19
Tanaka, F., Cicourel, A., and Movellan, J.R. 2007. Socialization between toddlers
and robots at an early childhood education center. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
104: 17954–8. doi:10.1073/pnas.0707769104
Teh, J.K.S., Cheok, A.D., Peiris, R.L., Choi, Y., Thuong, V., and Lai, S. 2008. Huggy
pajama: a mobile parent and child hugging communication system. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children IDC
‘08, 250–257. New York, NY: ACM.
Thompson, E.H., and Hampton, J.A. 2011. The effect of relationship status on
communicating emotions through touch. Cognit. Emot. 25: 295–306. doi:10.
1080/02699931.2010.492957
Toet, A., van Erp, J.B.F., Petrignani, F.F., Dufrasnes, M.H., Sadhashivan, A., van
Alphen, D., et al. 2013. Reach out and touch somebody’s virtual hand. Affectively
connected through mediated touch. In Proceedings of the 2013 Humaine Association Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 786–791.
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society.
Tsalamlal, M.Y., Ouarti, N., Martin, J.C., and Ammi, M. 2014. Haptic
communication of dimensions of emotions using air jet based tactile
stimulation. J. Multimodal User Interfaces 9(1): 69–77. doi:10.1007/s12193-014
-0162-3
Tsetserukou, D. 2010. HaptiHug: a novel haptic display for communication of hug
over a distance. In Haptics: Generating and Perceiving Tangible Sensations, Edited
by A.M. Kappers, J.B. Erp, W.M. Bergmann Tiest, and F.C. Helm, 340–347.
Berlin: Springer.
Tsetserukou, D., and Neviarouskaya, A. 2010. Innovative real-time communication
system with rich emotional and haptic channels. In Haptics: Generating and

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

Perceiving Tangible Sensations, Edited by A.M. Kappers, J.B. van Erp, W.M.
Bergmann Tiest, and F.C. Helm, 306–313. Berlin: Springer.
Tsihrintzis, G.A., Virvou, M., Alepis, E., and Stathopoulou, I.O. 2008. Towards
improving visual-facial emotion recognition through use of complementary
keyboard-stroke pattern information. In Fifth International Conference on
Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG 2008), 32–37. Piscataway,
NJ: IEEE.
Uvnäs-Moberg, K. 1997. Physiological and endocrine effects of social contact. Ann.
N. Y. Acad. Sci. 807: 146–63. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1997.tb51917.x
Vallbo, A., Olausson, H., Wessberg, J., and Norrsell, U. 1993. A system of unmyelinated afferents for innocuous mechanoreception in the human skin. Brain Res.
628: 301–4. doi:10.1016/0006-8993(93)90968-S
Van Bel, D.T., IJsselsteijn, W.A., and de Kort, Y.A.W. 2008. Interpersonal connectedness: conceptualization and directions for a measurement instrument. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’08), 3129–3134. New York, NY: ACM.
van Bel, D.T., Smolders, K.C.H.J., IJsselsteijn, W.A., and de Kort, Y.A.W. 2009. Social
connectedness: concept and measurement. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Intelligent Environments, Edited by V. Callaghan, A. Kameas, A.
Reyes, D. Royo, and M. Weber, 67–74. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
van Erp, J.B.F. 2007. Tactile Displays for Navigation and Orientation: Perception and
Behaviour. Utrecht: Utrecht University.
van Erp, J.B.F. 2012. The ten rules of touch: guidelines for social agents and robots
that can touch. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference on Computer
Animation and Social Agents (CASA 2012), Singapore: Nanayang Technological
University.
van Erp, J.B.F., Kyung, K.-U., Kassner, S., Carter, J., Brewster, S., Weber, G., et al.
2010. Setting the standards for haptic and tactile interactions: ISO’s work. In
Haptics: Generating and Perceiving Tangible Sensations. Proceedings of Eurohaptics 2010, Edited by A.M.L. Kappers, J.B.F. van Erp, W.M. Bergmann Tiest, and
F.C.T. van der Helm, 353–358. Heidelberg: Springer.
van Erp, J.B.F., and Toet, A. 2013. How to touch humans. Guidelines for social agents
and robots that can touch. In Proceedings of the 2013 Humaine Association Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 780–785. Geneva:IEEE
Computer Society. doi:10.1109/ACII.2013.77145
van Erp, J.B.F., and van Veen, H.A.H.C. 2004. Vibrotactile in-vehicle navigation
system. Transp. Res. Part F Traffic Psychol. Behav. 7: 247–56. doi:10.1016/j.trf.
2004.09.003
van Wingerden, S., Uebbing, T.J., Jung, M.M., and Poel, M. 2014. A neural network
based approach to social touch classification. In Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Emotion Representation and Modelling in Human-Computer-InteractionSystems (ERM4HCI ‘14), 7–12. New York, NY: ACM.
Vinciarelli, A., Pantic, M., Bourlard, H., and Pentland, A. 2008. Social signal processing: state-of-the-art and future perspectives of an emerging domain. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 1061–1070.
New York, NY: ACM.
Vrontou, S., Wong, A.M., Rau, K.K., Koerber, H.R., and Anderson, D.J. 2013.
Genetic identification of C fibres that detect massage-like stroking of hairy skin
in vivo. Nature 493: 669–73. doi:10.1038/nature11810
Wada, K., Ikeda, Y., Inoue, K., and Uehara, R. 2010. Development and preliminary
evaluation of a caregiver’s manual for robot therapy using the therapeutic seal
robot Paro. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN 2010), 533–538. Piscataway, NJ:
IEEE.
Wada, K., and Shibata, T. 2007. Living with seal robots – its sociopsychological
and physiological influences on the elderly at a care house. IEEE Trans. Rob. 23:
972–80. doi:10.1109/TRO.2007.906261
Walker, S.C., and McGlone, F.P. 2015. Perceived pleasantness of social touch reflects
the anatomical distribution and velocity tuning of C-tactile afferents: an affective
homunculus. In Program No. 339.14/HH22. 2014 Neuroscience Meeting Planner,
Washington, DC: Society for Neuroscience.
Wang, R., and Quek, F. 2010. Touch & talk: contextualizing remote touch for affective interaction. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ‘10), 13–20. New York, NY: ACM.
Wang, R., Quek, F., Tatar, D., Teh, K.S., and Cheok, A.D. 2012. Keep in touch:
channel, expectation and experience. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ‘12, 139–148. New York, NY: ACM.

13

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

van Erp and Toet

Social touch in HCI

Whitcher, S.J., and Fisher, J.D. 1979. Multidimensional reaction to therapeutic touch
in a hospital setting. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 37: 87–96. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.
1.87
Wigram, A.L. 1996. The Effects of Vibroacoustic Therapy on Clinical and NonClinical Populations. Ph.D. thesis, St. George’s Hospital Medical School, London
University, London.
Yohanan, S., Chan, M., Hopkins, J., Sun, H., and MacLean, K. 2005. Hapticat: exploration of affective touch. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI ‘05), 222–229. New York, NY:
ACM.
Yohanan, S., and MacLean, K. 2012. The role of affective touch in human-robot
interaction: human intent and expectations in touching the haptic creature. Int.
J. Soc. Rob. 4: 163–80. doi:10.1007/s12369-011-0126-7

Frontiers in Digital Humanities | www.frontiersin.org

Zacharatos, H., Gatzoulis, C., and Chrysanthou, Y.L. 2014. Automatic emotion
recognition based on body movement analysis: a survey. IEEE CGA 34: 35–45.
doi:10.1109/MCG.2014.106
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2015 van Erp and Toet. This is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or
licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these terms.

14

May 2015 | Volume 2 | Article 2

