Since Modigliani and Miller (1958), economists have relaxed many of their
assumptions to understand the observed behavior of leverage ratios. Arguably,
the trade-off theory has emerged as one of the leading paradigms, even though
it has been often challenged by empirical tests that appear to favor other
theories or suggest taxes are not that important. Therefore, there is still no
consensus in the literature. Moreover, none of the extant theories jointly
address the following questions in a parsimonious and simple framework:
(1) why firms tend to use debt financing so conservatively, (2) whether there
is indeed a target leverage ratio and partial adjustment toward it, (3) why the leverage-growth relation is negative, and (4) why average leverage paths
persist for over two decades.
To answers these questions, we extend Hackbarth and Mauer (2012) to
multiple financing and investment decisions that maximize initial value. We
develop two versions of a dynamic model with endogenous financing and
investment decisions. While the multistage model features two sequentially
exercisable investment options, the single-stage model has only one investment option. The single-stage model serves as a benchmark to gauge
investment-financing interactions in the multistage model. In both versions,
the capital expenditure is funded by a mix of debt and equity. This mixture not
only trades off tax benefits of debt against bankruptcy costs (triggered by an
endogenous default decision) but also recognizes financial flexibility in the
multistage model.
The solution of the dynamic model offers a rich set of novel predictions that
link the behavior of a firm’s leverage ratios to its investment opportunities.
First, a role for financial flexibility emerges endogenously because dynamic
financing-investment interactions between stages lead to an “intertemporal
effect” in the multistage model: reaping investment (i.e., cash flow) and tax
benefits sooner by issuing more debt in the first stage to fund the investment
cost reduces financial flexibility for funding more of the investment cost with
debt in the second stage. In comparison to the single-stage model, firms
underutilize debt in the multistage model when financing investment the first
time to retain financial flexibility. Because both debt issues jointly optimize
initial equity value (and hence internalize dilutive externalities on each other),
underutilization of debt persists when firms mature (i.e., exercise their last
investment options), and underutilization is more (less) severe for more backloaded (front-loaded) investment opportunities. It is worth noting that leverage
does not vary with investment in the single-stage model. Only in the multistage model leverage dynamics crucially hinge on the structure of the investment process in that it creates significant variation target leverage ratios.1
Second, optimizing behavior by firms in a dynamic trade-off model with
investment generates a significant fraction of low or zero leverage firms and
path-dependent, persistent leverage ratios. Our analysis shows how incentives
to retain financial flexibility in the first stage crucially depend on the structure
of the investment process. Given the wide range of optimal target leverage
ratios, the model suggests that leverage ratios can greatly vary depending on
how the firm grows assets-in-place by exercising its real options.
Third, structural models without dynamic financing-investment interactions
(1) overestimate target leverage ratios, and (2) can be misleading in that they
imply a fixed target leverage ratio that is largely taken to be exogenous to the
investment process. It thus seems difficult to determine target leverage in the conventional sense. This also suggests that there is no meaningful measurement of partial adjustment toward target leverage (as in, e.g., Flannery and
Rangan 2006) without recognizing the structure of the investment process.2
To test the model’s ability to match observed outcomes, we estimate key
model parameters via simulated method of moments (SMM). Intuitively,
SMM finds the set of parameters, which minimizes the difference of the
simulated model moments and the data moments from COMPUSTAT’s
annual tapes for the period of 1965 to 2009. We then split the full sample
into low, medium, and high market-to-book (or q) subsamples and employ
SMM also to fit the four parameters for each subsample. We split the sample
based on q to proxy for investment opportunities. Low q firms tend to have
fewer investment opportunities, whereas high q firms tend to have more
investment opportunities. Therefore, the relative value of q is informative
about the structure of the investment process in the real data. Our estimation
results reveal that high q firms have the most back-loaded investment processes, and low q firms have the most front-loaded ones.
Graham (2000) reports that firms, even stable and profitable, use less debt
than predicted by the static view of the tax benefits of debt. Two of five firms
have an average leverage ratio of less than 20%, and the median firm uses
only 31.4% leverage over the 1965 to 2000 period, which implies a “low
leverage puzzle.” More recently, Strebulaev and Yang (2013) find that on
average 10% of firms have zero leverage and almost 22% firms have less
than 5% quasi-market leverage, which represents a “zero leverage puzzle.”
We emphasize the importance of real frictions in a dynamic trade-off model
and thereby provide an economically meaningful mechanism for why firms
tend to use debt financing so conservatively. Based on the structural estimation results for the full sample, the simulated economies feature a significant
fraction of low (and zero) leverage firms. Moreover, in contrast to much
higher point estimates in prior studies, we report, on average, 20% leverage
in dynamics (i.e., for all firms) and 19% at investment points (i.e., for investing firms).
In addition, we perform capital structure regressions on simulated data and
show that the model can replicate stylized facts established by empirical
research. In the spirit of Strebulaev (2007), simulation of the multistage model
of corporate investment and financing dynamics reinforces the need to differentiate investment points from other data points when interpreting coefficient
estimates for market-to-book or profitability in a dynamic world. Consistent
with Frank and Goyal (2009) and others, we find leverage is negatively related
to the risk of cash flows, the cost of bankruptcy, and market-to-book, but
positively related the size of the firm and the tax rate. Finally, we document that real frictions in a dynamic model can produce
average leverage paths that closely resemble the ones in the data (e.g.,
Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender 2008).3 That is, endogenous investment and
financing decisions in a dynamic model can largely explain the otherwise
puzzling patterns that, despite of some convergence, average leverage ratios
across portfolios are fairly stable over time for both types of sorts (i.e., actual
and unexpected leverage) performed by these authors.4 To do so, we extend
the multistage model to randomly imposed initial variation in leverage. If
model firms are “born” with high (low) leverage ratios at the beginning,
then they maintain their relatively high (low) levels for over two decades
(despite of the fact that leverage ratios converge somewhat to more moderate
levels over time). This result illustrates that corporations, which know the
structure of their investment processes, take it into account and make decisions on debt usage accordingly. This leads to fairly stable leverage ratios, and
serves in the simulations as an important, unobserved determinant of the
permanent component of leverage.
The simplicity of our model allows us to develop a deeper understanding of
related results of the growing literature that extends Leland (1994) to interactions between investment and financing decisions.5 Hackbarth and Mauer’s
(2012) novel modeling feature is the explicit recognition that the firm’s existing capital structure influences future investment decisions through debtequity (agency) conflicts as well as financing mix of future investment.
Like Sundaresan, Wang, and Yang (2015), we extend their model to multiple
investment projects. While firms in Sundaresan et al. exhibit identical leverage
ratios when the last option is exercised, final leverage ratios of our model
firms vary widely.6 Titman and Tsyplakov (2007) numerically solve a complex model that features both financing and investment decision evolving over
time. In contrast to, for example, Sundaresan et al. their model is based on
continuous investment decisions (as in Brennan and Schwartz 1984), whereas
our model focuses on discrete, irreversible, or lumpy investment that is equivalent to a “real transaction” cost so that the firm does not continuously invest
or refinance. 