State v. Loomis, 371 Wis.2d 235, 881 N.W.2d 749 (2016), cert. denied, 137
S. Ct. 2290 (2017)
The defendant was convicted of various offenses arising out of a drive-by
shooting. His presentence report included an evidence-based risk assessment that
indicated a high risk of recidivism. On appeal, the defendant argued that
consideration of the risk assessment by the sentencing judge violated his right to
due process. The Supreme Court rejected the argument. However, it imposed
conditions on the use of risk assessments.
State v. Morrill, No. A-1-CA-36490, 2019 WL 3765586 (N.M. App. July 24, 2019)
Defendant asks this Court to ‘find that the attestations made by a computer program
constitute ‘statements,’ whether attributable to an artificial intelligence software or the
software developer who implicitly offers the program’s conclusions as their own.’
(Emphasis omitted.) Based on that contention, Defendant further argues that the
automated conclusions from Roundup and Forensic Toolkit constitute inadmissible
hearsay statements that are not admissible under the business record exception. In so
arguing, Defendant acknowledges that such a holding would diverge from the plain
language of our hearsay rule’s relevant definitions that reference statements of a
‘person.’ *** Based on the following, we conclude the district court correctly determined
that the computer generated evidence produced by Roundup and Forensic Toolkit was
11
not hearsay. Agent Peña testified that his computer runs Roundup twenty-four hours a
day, seven days a week and automatically attempts to make connections with and
downloads from IP addresses that are suspected to be sharing child pornography. As it
does so, Roundup logs every action it takes. Detective Hartsock testified that Forensic
Toolkit organizes information stored on seized electronic devices into various categories
including graphics, videos, word documents, and internet history. Because the software
programs make the relevant assertions, without any intervention or modification by a
person using the software, we conclude that the assertions are not statements by a
person governed by our hearsay rules.
State v. Pickett, 466 N.J. Super. 270 (App. Div. 2021), motions to expand
record, for leave to appeal, and for stay denied, State v. Pickett, 246 N.J. 48
(2021)
In this case of first impression addressing the proliferation of forensic evidentiary
technology in criminal prosecutions, we must determine whether defendant is entitled to
trade secrets of a private company for the sole purpose of challenging at a Frye hearing
the reliability of the science underlying novel DNA analysis software and expert
testimony. At the hearing, the State produced an expert who relied on his company’s
complex probabilistic genotyping software program to testify that defendant’s DNA was
present, thereby connecting defendant to a murder and other crimes. Before crossexamination of the expert, the judge denied defendant access to the trade secrets, which
include the software’s source code and related documentation.
This is the first appeal in New Jersey addressing the science underlying the proffered
testimony by the State’s expert, who designed, utilized, and relied upon TrueAllele, the
program at issue. TrueAllele is technology not yet used or tested in New Jersey; it is
designed to address intricate interpretational challenges of testing low levels or complex
mixtures of DNA. TrueAllele’s computer software utilizes and implements an elaborate
mathematical model to estimate the statistical probability that a particular individual’s
DNA is consistent with data from a given sample, as compared with genetic material from
another, unrelated individual from the broader relevant population. For this reason,
TrueAllele, and other probabilistic genotyping software, marks a profound shift in DNA
forensics.
TrueAllele’s software integrates multiple scientific disciplines. At issue here—in
determining the reliability of TrueAllele—is whether defendant is entitled to the trade
secrets to cross-examine the State’s expert at the Frye hearing to challenge whether his
testimony has gained general acceptance within the computer science community, which
is one of the disciplines. The defense expert’s access to the proprietary information is
directly relevant to that question and would allow that expert to independently test
whether the evidentiary software operates as intended. Without that opportunity,
12
defendant is relegated to blindly accepting the company’s assertions as to its reliability.
And importantly, the judge would be unable to reach an informed reliability
determination at the Frye hearing as part of his gatekeeping function.
Hiding the source code is not the answer. The solution is producing it under a protective
order. Doing so safeguards the company’s intellectual property rights and defendant’s
constitutional liberty interest alike. Intellectual property law aims to prevent business
competitorsfrom stealing confidential commercial information in the marketplace; it was
never meant to justify concealing relevant information from parties to a criminal
prosecution in the context of a Frye hearing. [footnote omitted].
State v. Saylor, 2019 Ohio 1025 (Ct. App. 2019) (concurring opinion of Froelich,
J.)
{¶ 49} Saylor is a 27-year-old heroin addict, who the court commented has ‘no adult
record [* * * and] has led a law-abiding life for a significant number of years’; his juvenile
record, according to the prosecutor, was ‘virtually nothing.’ The prosecutor requested an
aggregate sentence of five to seven years, and defense counsel requested a three-year
sentence. The trial court sentenced Saylor to 12 1/2 years in prison. Although it found
Saylor to be indigent and did not impose the mandatory fine, the court imposed a $500
fine and assessed attorney fees and costs; the court also specifically disapproved a Risk
Reduction sentence or placement in the Intensive Program Prison (IPP).
{¶ 50} I have previously voiced my concerns about the almost unfettered discretion
available to a sentencing court when the current case law apparently does not permit a
review for abuse of discretion. State v. Roberts, 2d Dist. Clark No. 2017-CA-98, 2018-Ohio4885, ¶ 42-45, (Froelich, J., dissenting). However, in this case, the trial court considered
the statutory factors in R.C. 2929.11 and R.C. 2929.12, the individual sentences were
within the statutory ranges, and the court’s consecutive sentencing findings, including the
course-of-conduct finding under R.C. 2929.14(C)(4)(b), were supported by the record.
{¶ 51} As for the trial court’s consideration of ORAS, the ‘algorithmization’ of sentencing
is perhaps a good-faith attempt to remove unbridled discretion – and its inherent biases
– from sentencing. Compare State v. Lawson, 2018-Ohio-1532, 111 N.E.3d 98, ¶ 20-21 (2d
Dist.) (Froelich, J., concurring). However, ‘recidivism risk modeling still involves human
choices about what characteristics and factors should be assessed, what hierarchy
governs their application, and what relative weight should be ascribed to each.’ Hillman,
The Use of Artificial Intelligence in Gauging the Risk of Recidivism, 58 The Judges Journal
40 (2019).
{¶ 52} The court’s statement that the ‘moderate’ score was ‘awfully high,’ given the lack
of criminal history, could imply that the court believed there must be other factors
reflected in the score that increased Saylor’s probable recidivism. There is nothing on this
record to refute or confirm the relevance of Saylor’s ORAS score or any ORAS score.
13
Certainly, the law of averages is not the law. The trial court’s comment further suggested
that its own assessment of Saylor’s risk of recidivism differed from the ORAS score. The
decision of the trial court is not clearly and convincingly unsupported by the record,
regardless of any weight potentially given to the ORAS score by the trial court. Therefore,
on this record, I find no basis for reversal