C. Reasonable Expectation of Profits Derived from Efforts of Others Usually, the main issue in analyzing a digital asset under the Howey test is whether a purchaser has a reasonable expectation of profits (or other financial returns) derived from the efforts of others.  A purchaser may expect to realize a return through participating in distributions or through other methods of realizing appreciation on the asset, such as selling at a gain in a secondary market.  When a promoter, sponsor, or other third party (or affiliated group of third parties) (each, an “Active Participant” or “AP”) provides essential managerial efforts that affect the success of the enterprise, and investors reasonably expect to derive profit from those efforts, then this prong of the test is met.  Relevant to this inquiry is the “economic reality”12 of the transaction and “what character the instrument is given in commerce by the terms of the offer, the plan of distribution, and the economic inducements held out to the prospect.”13  The inquiry, therefore, is an objective one, focused on the transaction itself and the manner in which the digital asset is offered and sold.    The following characteristics are especially relevant in an analysis of whether the third prong of the Howey test is satisfied. 1. Reliance on the Efforts of Others The inquiry into whether a purchaser is relying on the efforts of others focuses on two key issues:   Does the purchaser reasonably expect to rely on the efforts of an AP? Are those efforts “the undeniably significant ones, those essential managerial efforts which affect the failure or success of the enterprise,”14 as opposed to efforts that are more ministerial in nature? Although no one of the following characteristics is necessarily determinative, the stronger their presence, the more likely it is that a purchaser of a digital asset is relying on the “efforts of others”: An AP is responsible for the development, improvement (or enhancement), operation, or promotion of the network,15 particularly if purchasers of the digital asset expect an AP to be performing or overseeing tasks that are necessary for the network or digital asset to achieve or retain its intended purpose or functionality.16 o Where the network or the digital asset is still in development and the network or digital asset is not fully functional at the time of the offer or sale, purchasers would reasonably expect an AP to further develop the functionality of the network or digital asset (directly or indirectly).  This particularly would be the case where an AP promises further developmental efforts in order for the digital asset to attain or grow in value.     There are essential tasks or responsibilities performed and expected to be performed by an AP, rather than an unaffiliated, dispersed community of network users (commonly known as a “decentralized” network). An AP creates or supports a market for,17 or the price of, the digital asset.  This can include, for example, an AP that:  (1) controls the creation and issuance of the digital asset; or (2) takes other actions to support a market price of the digital asset, such as by limiting supply or ensuring scarcity, through, for example, buybacks, “burning,” or other activities. An AP has a lead or central role in the direction of the ongoing development of the network or the digital asset.  In particular, an AP plays a lead or central role in deciding governance issues, code updates, or how third parties participate in the validation of transactions that occur with respect to the digital asset. An AP has a continuing managerial role in making decisions about or exercising judgment concerning the network or the characteristics or rights the digital asset represents including, for example: o Determining whether and how to compensate persons providing services to the network or to the entity or entities charged with oversight of the network. o Determining whether and where the digital asset will trade.  For example, purchasers may reasonably rely on an AP for liquidity, such as where the AP has arranged, or promised to arrange for, the trading of the digital asset on a secondary market or platform. o Determining who will receive additional digital assets and under what conditions. o Making or contributing to managerial level business decisions, such as how to deploy funds raised from sales of the digital asset. o Playing a leading role in the validation or confirmation of transactions on the network, or in some other way having responsibility for the ongoing security of the network.   o Making other managerial judgements or decisions that will directly or indirectly impact the success of the network or the value of the digital asset generally.  Purchasers would reasonably expect the AP to undertake efforts to promote its own interests and enhance the value of the network or digital asset, such as where: o The AP has the ability to realize capital appreciation from the value of the digital asset.  This can be demonstrated, for example, if the AP retains a stake or interest in the digital asset.  In these instances, purchasers would reasonably expect the AP to undertake efforts to promote its own interests and enhance the value of the network or digital asset. o The AP distributes the digital asset as compensation to management or the AP’s compensation is tied to the price of the digital asset in the secondary market.  To the extent these facts are present, the compensated individuals can be expected to take steps to build the value of the digital asset. o The AP owns or controls ownership of intellectual property rights of the network or digital asset, directly or indirectly. o The AP monetizes the value of the digital asset, especially where the digital asset has limited functionality. In evaluating whether a digital asset previously sold as a security should be reevaluated at the time of later offers or sales, there would be additional considerations as they relate to the “efforts of others,” including but not limited to: Whether or not the efforts of an AP, including any successor AP, continue to be important to the value of an investment in the digital asset. Whether the network on which the digital asset is to function operates in such a manner that purchasers would no longer reasonably expect an AP to carry out essential managerial or entrepreneurial efforts. Whether the efforts of an AP are no longer affecting the enterprise’s success. 
