NSLP and SBP (the school meals programs) provide federal support for meals served in roughly 90,000 public and private elementary and secondary schools nationwide. They also support meals served in a smaller number of residential child care institutions. Schools receive federal aid in the form of cash reimbursements for every meal they serve that meets federal nutritional
requirements (limited to one breakfast and lunch per child daily). The largest subsidies are provided for free and reduced-price meals served to eligible students based on income eligibility and categorical eligibility rules (discussed below). Schools also receive a certain amount of commodity assistance per lunch served (discussed previously). Schools participating in NSLP have the option of providing afterschool snacks through the program, and schools participating in
NSLP or SBP have the option of providing summer meals and snacks through the Seamless Summer Option (discussed in the “After-School Meals and Snacks” and “Seamless Summer Option” sections).
Schools are not required by federal law to participate in NSLP or SBP; however, some states require schools to have a school lunch and/or breakfast program, and some require schools to operate such programs through NSLP and/or SBP. Some states also provide state funding for the school meals programs, including nine states (as of the cover date of this report) that have authorized funding to provide free meals to all students.
Schools that do not participate in the federal school meals programs may still operate locally funded meal programs.
The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010 (HHFKA; P.L. 111-296) made several changes to the school meals programs. Among those changes was a requirement that USDA update the nutrition standards for school meals and create new nutritional requirements for foods sold in NSLP and SBP schools within a certain timeframe. The law also created the Community Eligibility Provision, through which eligible schools can provide free meals to all students. These changes
are discussed further within this section.
NSLP and SBP are two separate programs, and schools can choose to operate one and not the other. The programs are discussed together in this report because they share many of the same requirements. Differences between the programs are noted where applicable. Participation in SBP tends to be lower than in NSLP for several reasons, including the traditionally required early arrival by students in order to receive a meal before school starts.
This section discusses topics specific to the school meals programs. Other food service topics relevant to child nutrition programs more broadly (e.g., the farm to school program) are discussed in the “Other Child Nutrition Activities” section.
