Four evolving technology trends modernizing the consumer products and retail industry
 1. Artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) and microcomputing to optimize and enhance experience and supply chain
 Why it’s important: In the CP&R industry, personalized experiences and efficient supply chains are paramount for winning in the market. Artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) and microcomputing technologies are crucial for achieving these objectives by enabling real-time data ingestion and action across customer interactions. This, in turn, empowers businesses to understand consumer preferences at a granular and even hyper-local level, driving increased sales and profitability, brand engagement and loyalty, and streamlined supply chain efforts.
 

 Now and in the future, brands and retailers will implement AI/ML across a host of use cases, such as:
 2. Generative AI for content creation and innovation
 Generative AI holds immense significance in CP&R for its ability to foster innovation in content creation and product development. By harnessing the power of GenAI, businesses can produce fresh and engaging content, get to market with speed and build rapid customer engagement models.
 

 GenAI is still in its early stages and so are its applications in CP&R, but it’s already clear that the possibilities are endless.
 

 

 Content generation and customization for marketing
 

 Product and promotional development and design
 

 

 Virtual shopping assistants
 

 

 Supplier communication and negotiation
 

 

 Quality control and defect detection
 

 CP&R companies should consider integrating GenAI into operations more broadly across the value chain. Organizations that find the most appropriate use cases and implement them at scale will drive the operational agility that industry stakeholders have been expecting for years. It will be critical to rethink how talent and capital allocation can be repositioned to better drive value when content and innovation can be available at the drop of a hat.
 

 3. Digital twin and predictive analytics to drive process controls and decision-making
 Digital twin technology and predictive analytics play a pivotal role in revolutionizing CP&R operations. They facilitate agility and offer a comprehensive view of product lifecycles, supply chains and manufacturing processes.
 

 Digital twin and predictive analytics are not new in CP&R, but applications for their use are becoming more robust
 

 

 Design and development optimization for consumer goods
 

 

 Manufacturing process optimization
 

 

 Inventory management and demand forecasting in retail
 

 As the CP&R industry becomes increasingly more digitally connected and complex, driven by software proliferation and the Internet of Things (IoT), companies should expand their use of digital twins to a wider range of interconnected value chain nodes. This approach will enable a more proactive response to disruption and market shifts by transforming these tools into a means for a truly dynamic enterprise, from the front office through to the back office.
 

 4. Cloud and ERP upgrades for efficiency and scalability
 With enterprise resource planning (ERP) upgrades imminent by 2025, modernization is foundational to integrating evolving technology capabilities. Cloud computing provides on-demand data storage and computing power, which is essential for supporting and scaling these new technologies.
 

 CP&R executives should be considering these applications to derive the most value from Cloud and ERP upgrades.
 

 

 Connecting systems from front to back office
 

 

 Real-time analytics and computing power
 

 

 Enhanced data security and compliance
 

 Companies must look at their legacy transaction systems and rationalize how to modernize them to create efficiencies, whether by integrating evolving tech that makes their systems more usable or by upgrading legacy transaction systems to keep pace with their front-end infrastructure.
 

 Considerations for consumer products and retail leaders to help transform evolving tech trends into ‘force multipliers’
 It's imperative to recognize that the true power and value behind an evolving digital landscape lie not just in the technologies themselves but in how companies strategically integrate and orchestrate them into their operations and strategic initiatives. The following considerations serve as a guide to help CP&R leaders start a journey down this transformative path.
 

 Data strategy: Establish robust data quality and governance frameworks, as inaccurate or poor-quality data can undermine the success of tech implementations.
 

 Zero-party data: Capitalize on data provided directly by consumers to personalize experiences and tailor product offerings to meet individual preferences.
 

 How EY can help
 

 Read more
 Evaluating the tech ecosystem: Continuously assess your technology ecosystem by building strategic alliances and leveraging partnerships to gain access to cutting-edge technologies and expertise, further driving innovation, agility and competitive advantage.
 

  
 

 Collaboration and co-opetition: Encourage data- and tech-enabled collaboration both within your organization and externally, as partnerships with suppliers, distributors and even competitors can foster innovation and create a more agile system.
 

  
 

 Governance: Establish clear governance policies and ethical guidelines for responsible technology use, particularly in areas like AI and data analytics.
 

  
 

 Talent agenda: Invest in employee training and upskilling to enable your workforce to effectively utilize technology and adapt to new tools and workflows.