Introduction, Concepts and Principles It is assumed that all pathologists know the construction and requirements for reporting the findings of a complete postmortem examination. The following is a guide for use in converting the standard autopsy protocol into the report of a medicolegal autopsy. All of the usual descriptive technics should be maintained. Greater attention to detail, accurate description of abnormal findings, and the addition of final conclusions and interpretations, will bring about this transformation. The hospital autopsy is an examination performed with the consent of the deceased person's relatives for the purposes of: (1) determining the cause of death; (2) providing correlation of clinical diagnosis and clinical symptoms; (3) determining the effectiveness of therapy; (4) studying the natural course of disease processes; and (5) educating students and physicians. The medicolegal autopsy is an examination performed under the law, usually ordered by the Medical Examiner and Coroner 1 for the purposes of: (1) determining the cause, manner, 2 and time of death; (2) recovering, identifying, and preserving evidentiary material; (3) providing interpretation and correlation of facts and circumstances related to death; (4) providing a factual, objective medical report for law enforcement, prosecution, and defense agencies; and (5) separating death due to disease from death due to external causes for protection of the innocent. The essential features of a medicolegal autopsy are: (1) to perform a complete autopsy; (2) to personally perform the examination and observe all findings so that interpretation may be sound; (3) to perform a thorough examination and overlook nothing which could later prove of importance; (4) to preserve all information by written and photographic records; and (5) to provide a professional report without bias.
Preliminary Procedures Before the clothing is removed, the body should be examined to determine the condition of the clothing, and to correlate tears and other defects with obvious injuries to the body, and to record the findings. The clothing, body, and hands should be protected from possible contamination prior to specific examination of each. A record of the general condition of the body and of the clothing should be made and the extent of rigo r and lividity, the temperature of the body and the environment, and any other data pertinent to the subsequent determination of the time of death also should be recorded. After the preliminary examination the clothing may be carefully removed by unbuttoning, unzippering, or unhooking to remove without tearing or cutting. If the clothing is wet or bloody, it must be hung up to dry in the air to prevent putrefaction and disintegration. Record and label each item of clothing. Preserve with proper identification for subsequent examination. Clothing may be examined in the laboratory with soft tissue x-ray and infrared photographs in addition to various chemical analyses and immunohematologic analyses. Autopsy Procedure -The..date, time and place of autopsy should be succinctly noted, and where and by whom it was performed, and any observers or participants should be named. The body should be identified, and all physical characteristics should be described. These include age, height, weight, sex, color of hair and eyes, state of nutrition and muscular development, scars,, and tattoos. Description of the teeth, the number present and absent, :and the general condition should be detailed noting any' abnormalities or deformities, or evidence of fracture, old or recent. In a separate paragraph or paragraphs describe all injuries, noting the number and characteristics of each including size, shape, pattern, and location in relation to anatomic landmarks. Describe the course, direction, and depth.of injuries and enumerate structures involved by the injury. Identify and label any'foreign object recovered ,and specify its relation to a given injury~ : ~, . ~:At' least one photograph should be taken to identify the body. Photograph injuries to document their location and be certain to, include a 'scale to show their size. Photographs can be used to demonstrate and correlate, external injuries with internal injuries and to demonstrate pathologic processes other than those of traumatic origin. ' Roentgenographic and fluoroscopic examinations tan be used to locate bullets or other radio-opaque objects, to identify the victim, and tO document fractures, anatomic deformities, and surgical procedures when such metallic.foreign bodies as plates, nails, screws, and wire sutures have been used. .. A general description of the head, neck, cervical spine., thorax, abdo2 men, genitalia, and extremities should be given in logical sequence. The course of wounds through various structures should be detailed remembering variations of position in relationships during life versus relationships after death and when supine on the autopsy table. Evidentiary items such as bullets, knives, or portions thereof, pellets or foreign materials, should be preserved and the point of recovery should be noted. Each should be labelled for proper identification. Each organ should be dissected and described, noting relationships and conditions.