Introduction 
In many respects, the notion that owning a home is an effective means of accumulating wealth 
among low-income and minority households has been the keystone underlying efforts to support 
homeownership in recent decades. The renewed emphasis on boosting homeownership rates as a policy 
goal that arose in the early 1990s can be traced in no small part to the seminal work by Oliver and 
Shapiro (1990) and Sherraden (1991) highlighting the importance of assets as a fundamental 
determinant of the long-run well-being of families and individuals. The efforts of these scholars led to a 
heightened awareness of the importance of assets in determining life's opportunities, enabling 
investments in education and businesses, providing economic security in times of lost jobs or poor 
health, and passing on advantages to children. Assessments of differences in asset ownership placed 
particularly emphasis on the tremendous gaps in homeownership rates by race/ethnicity and income 
and the importance of these gaps in explaining differences in wealth. In announcing their own initiatives 
to close these homeownership gaps, both President Clinton and President Bush gave prominent 
attention to the foundational role that homeownership plays in providing financial security (Herbert and 
Belsky, 2006). 
But while faith in homeownership's financial benefits are widely subscribed to, there have long 
been challenges to the view that owning a home is necessarily an effective means of producing wealth 
for lower-income and minority households. In 2001 the Joint Center for Housing Studies hosted a 
symposium with the goal of "examining the unexamined goal" of boosting low-income homeownership 
(Retsinas and Belsky, 2002a). The general conclusion that emerged from this collection of papers was 
that lower-income households do benefit from owning homes, although this conclusion was subject to a 
variety of "caveats and codicils" (Retsinas and Belsky, 2002b, page 11). A few of these caveats related to 
whether financial benefits were likely to materialize, with papers finding that all too commonly 
homebuyers sold their homes for real losses while alternative investments offered higher returns 
(Belsky and Duda, 2002; Goetzmann and Speigel, 2002). In perhaps the most comprehensive critique of 
the policy emphasis of fostering low-income homeownership, Shlay (2006) reviewed existing scholarly 
evidence to cast doubt on the likelihood that either the financial or social benefits of owning would be 
realized. 
These criticisms have only grown louder in the aftermath of the housing bust, as trillions of 
dollars in wealth evaporated leaving more than 10 million homeowners owing more than their homes 
are worth and leading to more than 4 million owners losing their homes to foreclosure (Joint Center for 
Housing Studies, 2012; Kiviat, 2010; Li and Yang, 2010; Davis, 2012). Many of the criticisms raised about 
1 
the financial risks of homeownership are not new, but the experience of the last five years has certainly 
given new impetus to these arguments. But there are also concerns that changes in the mortgage 
market and in consumer behavior may have exacerbated these risks, increasing the odds that owners 
will, at best, be less likely to realize any financial gains from owning and, at worse, face a heightened risk 
of foreclosure. 
The goal of this paper is to reassess in the light of recent experience whether homeownership is 
likely to be an effective means of wealth creation for low-income and minority households. Has the 
experience of the last decade proven the arguments of earlier critics of homeownership? Have changes 
in the market affected whether these benefits are likely to be realized? The paper takes three 
approaches to address these questions. We begin by presenting a conceptualization of the risks and 
rewards of homeownership as a financial choice, with a particular eye toward whether the odds of a 
beneficial outcome are lower for lower-income and minority owners. This review also assesses whether 
recent experience has altered this calculus-as opposed to just raising our awareness of the proper 
weighting of the likelihood of realizing the benefits while sidestepping the risks. Next, we review the 
existing literature examining the financial benefits of owning a home, including both studies simulating 
the returns to owning and renting as well as studies using panel surveys to track actual wealth 
accumulation among owners and renters. Finally, we examine data from the Survey of Consumer 
Finance (SCF) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) covering the last decade to assess how 
owning a home has been associated with changes in household financial balance sheets over this period. 
To preview our conclusions, we find that while there is no doubt that homeownership entails 
real financial risks, there continues to be strong support for the association between owning a home and 
accumulating wealth. This relationship held even during the tumultuous period from 1999 to 2009, 
under less than ideal conditions. Importantly, while homeownership is associated with somewhat lower 
gains in wealth among minorities and lower-income households, these gains are on average still positive 
and substantial. In contrast, renters generally do not see any gains in wealth. Those who buy homes but 
do not sustain this ownership also do not experience any gains in wealth, but are generally left no worse 
off in wealth terms than they were prior to buying a home-although of course there may still be 
substantial costs from these failed attempts at owning in terms of physical and mental health as well as 
future costs of credit. 
We conclude that homeownership continues to represent an important opportunity for 
individuals and families of limited means to accumulate wealth. As such, policies to support 
homeownership can be justified as a means of alleviating wealth disparities by extending this 
2 
opportunity to those who are in a position to succeed as owners under the right conditions. The key, of 
course, is to identify the conditions where lower-income and minority households are most likely to 
succeed as owners and so realize this potential while avoiding the significant costs of failure. 
Assessing the Financial Risks and Rewards of Homeownership 
Before turning to evidence about the financial returns to homeownership, it is helpful to start by 
framing the arguments about why homeownership is thought to be an effective means of generating 
wealth as well as the counter arguments about why these benefits may not materialize, particularly for 
lower-income and minority homeowners. We then consider how changes in mortgage markets and 
consumer behavior may have altered the likelihood that owning will lead to financial gains. This framing 
helps provide a basis for interpreting the findings from the following two sections of the paper that 
examine evidence about the association between homeowning and wealth accumulation. 
The Potential Financial Benefits of Owning 
The belief that homeownership can be an important means of creating wealth has its roots in 
five factors. First, the widespread use of amortizing mortgages to finance the acquisition of the home 
results in forced savings as a portion of the financing cost each month goes toward principal reduction. 
While modest in the early years of repayment, the share of the payment going toward principal 
increases over time. For example, assuming a 30-year loan with a 5 percent interest rate, a homeowner 
will have paid off about 8 percent of the mortgage after 5 years, 19 percent after 10 years, and nearly a 
third after 15 years. Assuming a household purchases a home in their early 30s and keeps on a path to 
pay off the mortgage over a thirty-year period, these forced savings will represent a sizable nest egg 
when they reach retirement age. In addition, an often overlooked aspect of forced savings associated 
with homeownership is the accumulation of the downpayment itself, which often entails a committed 
effort to accumulate savings in a short period. 
Second, homes are generally assumed to experience some degree of real appreciation over 
time, reflecting increased overall demand for housing due to growth in both population and incomes 
against a backdrop of a fixed supply of land located near centers of economic activity. Shiller (2005) has 
been the most notable critic of this point of view, arguing that over the very long-run real house prices 
have only barely exceeded inflation. Lawler (2012), however, has argued that Shiller's house price 
estimates and measures of inflation result in an underestimate of real house price growth. Analysis of 
trends in real house prices across a range of market areas support the conclusion that these trends 
3 
reflect a complex interaction of supply and demand factors in local markets that defy simple 
categorization (Capozza et al. 2002, Gallin, 2006). At a national level the Federal Housing Finance 
Agency house price index indicates that between 1975 and 2012 the compound annual growth rate in 
house prices has exceed inflation by 0.8 percentage points. Even at a modest rate of increase, the 
compounding of these returns over a longer period of time can be produce substantial increase in real 
home values. Assuming just a 0.8 percent annual real increase in house values over 30 years an owner 
will experience a real gain of about 26 percent in the overall house value. 
The use of financing can further leverage these returns. A homebuyer with a modest 
downpayment gets the benefit of increases in the overall asset value despite their small equity stake. 
While the cost of financing can create a situation of negative leverage if the increase in house values is 
lower than the cost of financing (so that the financing costs exceed the increase in the asset value), this 
risk diminishes over time as the value of the house compounds while the debt payment is fixed. 
Through leverage, the rate of return on an investment in a home can be substantial even when the 
increase in house values is modest. Consider the case where a buyer puts down 5 percent and the 
house appreciates at 4 percent annually. After 5 years the home will have increased in value by nearly 
22 percent or more than 4 times the initial 5 percent downpayment. Even allowing for selling costs of 
6 percent, this would represent an annualized return of 31 percent on the owner's initial investment. 
Due to leverage, even nominal increases in home values that do not exceed inflation can result in real 
returns. In the above example, if inflation matched the 4 percent growth in home prices, the owner 
would still have earned a substantial real return on their initial investment. 
Federal income tax benefits from owning a home can also be substantial. The ability to deduct 
mortgage interest and property taxes is the most apparent of these benefits. Taxpayers who are able to 
make full use of these deductions receive a discount on these portions of ongoing housing costs at the 
taxpayer's marginal tax rate, ranging from 15 percent for moderate income households up to 39 percent 
for the highest tax bracket. In addition, capital gains on the sale of a principal residence up to $250,000 
for single persons and $500,000 for married couples are also excluded from capital gains taxation, which 
is currently 15 percent for most households and 20 percent for the highest income bracket.1 
1 
An additional tax benefit that is often overlooked is the fact that while owner occupants benefit from the use of their home as a residence they do not have to pay any tax on these benefits, referred to as the implicit rental income from the property (that is, the rent one would have to pay to occupy the home) (Ozanne, 2012). The loss of revenue to the U.S. Treasury from this exclusion is substantial, outweighing the costs of the mortgage interest deduction. 
4 
Finally, owning a home provides a hedge against inflation in rents over time. Sinai and Souleles 
(2005) find that homeownership rates and housing values are both higher in markets where rents are 
more volatile, indicating the value placed on being able to protect against rent fluctuations. Under most 
circumstances, mortgage payments also decline in real terms over time, reducing housing costs as a 
share of income. For long-term owners, this can result in fairly substantial savings in the out of pocket 
costs for required for housing. Assuming a fixed rate mortgage, inflation of 3 percent, 1 percent growth 
in both real house prices and the costs of property taxes, insurance and maintenance, real monthly 
housing costs would decline by about 10 percent after 5 years, 15 percent after 10 years, and 30 percent 
by the last year of the mortgage. Once the mortgage is paid off, the out of pocket costs of owning in real 
terms are less than half the payments made at the time of purchase. Housing costs for renters, in 
contrast, would be expected to keep pace with inflation in housing prices. 
The Potential Financial Risks of Owning 
Combined, the financial benefits outlined above can fuel significant wealth accumulation. But as 
the last few years have made painfully clear, the financial benefits associated with owning a home are 
not without risk. To begin with, house prices can be volatile. That was certainly the case in the wake of 
the housing bust, as nominal prices fell nationally by some 25 percent or more (depending upon the 
specific price index used), with the hardest hit markets experiencing declines of more than 40 percent. 
Almost no area of the country was spared from some degree of decline. According to the FHFA index, 
nominal prices fell in every state with the exception of North Dakota. But while recent experience is 
notable for the breadth and depth of price declines, there are other examples of fairly significant price 
declines over the last few decades, including declines of between 10 and 20 percent in some Oil Patch 
states in the 1980s and in New England, California and Hawaii in the early 1990s. 
There are also a number of markets where house prices trends have historically been more 
stable, but in these areas long-run real price increases have either not kept pace with inflation or have 
been modest. House price growth has been particularly weak in a number of markets in the Midwest 
and South where population and income growth have been low. Based on long-run state level indexes 
from FHFA, between 1975 and 2012 there were 10 states in these regions where the compound annual 
growth in house prices did not exceed general price inflation. Even before the bust, homeowners in 
these markets did not have the benefit of real growth in house prices over the long term. In nine other 
states house price growth did beat inflation, but by less than 0.25 percent on an annual basis. Thus, in 
about two-fifths of states real house price growth was either non-existent or trivial. At the other 
5 
extreme there were 17 states, mostly along the Pacific coast and in the Northeast that experienced real 
house price growth of more than 1 percent, including 5 states that exceeded 2 percent. 
There are also peculiar aspects of owning a home that further exacerbate the financial risks of 
these investments. Homeowners make a significant investment in a specific location and cannot 
diversify the risk of home price declines by spreading this investment across assets or across markets. 
Homes values are also high relative to incomes and so account for a large share of household wealth. 
Wolff (2012) reports that in 2010 the value of the principal residence accounted for two-thirds of total 
wealth among households in the middle three quintiles of the wealth distribution. With so much wealth 
tied up in one asset, homeowners are particularly vulnerable to changes in home values. The use of 
debt financing for a large share of the purchase further magnifies these risks, with even small drops in 
prices wiping out substantial shares of homeowner equity. Indeed, at the height of the housing bust the 
number of households underwater on their mortgages was estimated by CoreLogic to have exceeded 11 
million while Zillow placed the number closer to 15 million. 
When assessed purely on the basis of real growth in values over time, housing also compares 
poorly to the returns offered by investments in diversified portfolios of stock or bonds. Geotzmann and 
Speigel (2002) compare the change in home prices in 12 market areas between 1980 and 1999 to a 
range of alternative investments and find that housing was consistently dominated as an investment 
asset by all of the financial alternatives considered, leading them to conclude that it is "surprising that 
housing continues to represent a significant portion of American household portfolios" (page 260). 
However, Flavin and Yamashita (2002) take a more expansive view of the returns on housing 
investments by including the value derived from occupying the unit, the use of financial leverage, and 
the ability to claim income tax deductions. This fuller treatment of housing's returns finds that the 
average rate of return was slightly below returns for investments in stocks, but the variance of these 
returns were also lower and so somewhat less risky. Still, even if the returns to housing are deemed to 
be competitive with alternative investments the concern remains that it accounts for an excessive share 
of low-wealth household's portfolios. 
Housing investments are also handicapped by high transaction costs associated with buying and 
selling these assets. Home buyers face fees for mortgage origination, title search and insurance, state 
and local taxes, home inspections, and legal fees, all of which can add up to several percentage points of 
the home value. Real estate broker commissions typically also command 6 percent of the sales price. 
These high transaction costs can absorb a significant share of home price appreciation from the first few 
years of occupancy. Given these high costs, home owners who are forced by circumstances to move 
6 
within a few years of buying will face the risk of loss of at least some share of their initial investment 
even if home values have risen modestly. 
The need to maintain the home also imposes financial risks on owners. While routine 
maintenance can keep both the physical structure and the home's major systems in good working order, 
major investments are periodically needed, such as painting the exterior or replacing the roof or heating 
system. These projects incur high costs that may be difficult for owners to afford. While owners may 
have the opportunity to plan for these investments over time, in some cases a system will fail with little 
warning and produce an unexpected cost that the owner cannot afford, creating a financial strain that in 
the most extreme cases can jeopardize the ability to maintain ownership. 
Finally, the financial costs of failing to sustain homeownership are high-in addition to the 
traumatic impacts that foreclosures can have on the health and psychic well-being of the owner (Carr 
and Anacker, 2012). Owners who default on their mortgage will not only lose whatever equity stake 
they had in the home, they are also likely to deplete their savings in a bid to maintain ownership and 
suffer significant damage to their credit history making it difficult and costly to obtain credit for several 
years to come. 
Factors Contributing to Wealth Accumulation Through Homeownership 
Whether and to what extent a homebuyer will realize the potential benefits of owning while 
avoiding succumbing to the risks depends on a complex set of factors. Herbert and Belsky (2006) 
present a detailed conceptual model of the factors that contribute to whether homeownership 
produces wealth over the life course, which is briefly summarized here. The most obvious factor is the 
timing of purchase relative to housing price cycles. The recent boom and bust in house prices presents a 
prime example. Homebuyers who bought in the early 2000s were poised to benefit from the massive 
run-up in prices that occurred in many markets, while those that bought in the mid 2000s entered just in 
time for the historic freefall in prices that followed. While other price cycles in recent decades may not 
have been as dramatic, the consequences of buying near troughs or peaks on wealth accumulation 
would have been similar. Belsky and Duda (2002) examined data on repeat sales in four market areas 
between 1982 and 1999 and found that roughly half of owners who bought and sold their homes within 
this time period failed to realize gains that beat inflation after assuming a 6 percent sales cost (although 
most did earn a return in nominal terms). Whether owners realized a positive return depended 
strongly on where in the housing price cycle they bought and sold their homes. 
7 
Belsky and Duda (2002) conclude that "although the golden rule of real estate is often cited as 
location, location, location, an equally golden rule is timing, timing, timing" (Page 223). Their conclusion 
points to another critical factor in how likely a home is to appreciate in value - in what market and in 
which specific neighborhood the home is located. As noted above, there have been sizeable differences 
across market areas in long-term house price trends, with areas along the coasts experiencing real gains 
of one percent or more over the last several decades while areas in the Midwest and South have had 
little or no gains. But there are also substantial variations in price trends across neighborhoods within a 
single market (for reviews of this literature see Herbert and Belsky, 2006; Dietz and Haurin, 2003; and 
McCarthy, Van Zandt and Rohe, 2001). Whether a household bought a home in Boston or Cleveland is 
an important factor in the returns realized, but so is whether the home was in a desirable area or a 
declining neighborhood. 
The terms of financing used to buy the home also matter. Higher interest rates lower the share 
of payments that are devoted to principal reduction in the early years of repayment, slowing wealth 
accumulation. The higher monthly costs of the mortgage also erode the ability of the household to meet 
other expenses and to save on an ongoing basis as additional interest payments over the life of the 
mortgage can be substantial. For example, over a thirty-year term a loan for $150,000 at 7 percent 
interest will require $69,000 more in interest payments than a 5 percent loan. Higher origination fees 
also sap savings, reducing the quality and size of home that is affordable and lowering the rate of return 
on housing investments. 
Choices about refinancing over time can also exert a strong influence on wealth accumulation. 
Taking advantage of declines in mortgage interest rates to reduce financing costs can save owners 
hundreds of dollars each month, and tens of thousands over the life of a mortgage-although 
continually resetting the term of the mortgage will reduce opportunities for forced savings. On the 
other hand, refinancing to take cash out of the property can erode wealth accumulation, particularly if 
the extracted funds are used to finance consumption rather than investments in the home, education, 
business or financial opportunities. Wealth accumulation will be further undermined if the new loan 
comes with high fees and higher interest rates. Of course, the ability to tap housing wealth as a buffer 
against income shocks is one of the virtues of developing this cushion, but using home equity to finance 
an unaffordable lifestyle is an unsustainable path. 
A host of other factors come into play in determining how much housing wealth is realized over 
the span of a lifetime. For example, buying higher valued homes-if successful-can produce more 
wealth both through forced savings and by earning returns on a higher valued asset. By the same 
8 
means, those who trade up to more expensive homes over time may also accrue greater housing 
wealth. The age at which a first home is purchased can also be significant, giving the household a longer 
period to accumulate wealth. Of course, the quality of the home purchased and the owner's ability to 
maintain it will also affect both ongoing maintenance costs and how much the home appreciates over 
time. 
But arguably the most fundamental factor-the true golden rule of how to accumulate wealth. 
through homeownership-is whether ownership is sustained over the long term. Housing booms aside, 
many of the financial benefits are slow to accumulate, including the slow build up of forced savings, the 
compounding of values at low appreciation rates, and the decline in monthly housing costs in real terms 
over time. The expression "time heals all wounds" may also be applicable to many of homeownerships 
most critical risks. The losses associated with buying near the peak of a price cycle will diminish over 
time as owners benefit from the next upswing in prices. And even in areas whether real growth in 
house prices does not occur or is limited, over the long term owners will still amass some degree of 
wealth through paying off the mortgage and as a result of savings from lower housing costs. On the flip 
side, a failure to sustain homeownership-particularly when the end result is a foreclosure-will wipe 
out any accrued wealth and bring additional costs in the form a damaged credit history that will incur 
further costs over time and limit opportunities to buy another home in the near term. 
To some degree whether ownership is sustained will depend on choices that owners make over 
time - including whether the home they buy is affordable, whether they make prudent choices about 
refinancing, and whether they maintain the home to avoid larger home repair bills. But whether owning 
is sustained also will depend on whether the household can weather any number of significant events 
that can fundamentally alter their financial circumstances, such as loss of a job, a serious health 
problem, or change in the family composition due to the birth of a child, death, divorce, or the need to 
care for a parent or relative. Over the course of a lifetime, these events are likely to befall most 
everyone. Whether homeownership can be sustained in the wake of these events will depend on the 
ability of the household to adjust to their changed circumstances and whether they have enough 
available savings to cushion the blow. 
Impediments to Wealth Creation among Lower-Income and Minority Homeowners 
Up to this point the discussion presented has considered homeownership's financial risks and 
rewards in a general sense. But the concern of this paper is specifically with the potential for 
homeownership to serve as an effective means of wealth accumulation for lower-income and minority 
9 
households. How are the odds of generating wealth as a homeowner likely to differ for these 
households?? 
In keeping with the fundamental importance of sustained homeownership to accumulate 
wealth, the chief concern is that these groups of homebuyers face a more difficult time in maintaining 
ownership. Studies analyzing panel data to document homeownership spells among first-time buyers 
consistently find that low-income and minority owners have a lower probability of maintaining 
homeownership for at least five years. In an analysis of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) 
from 1979 through 2000 Haurin and Rosenthal (2004) find that ownership is less likely to be sustained 
among both these groups. Specifically, only 57 percent of low-income buyers were found to still own 
their first home five years later, compared to 70 percent of high-income owners (with income categories 
defined by income quartiles at age 25). First homeownership spells were also found to be much shorter 
for minorities, averaging 6.5 years among whites, compared to 4.4 years for blacks and 5.4 years for 
Hispanics. In an analysis of the PSID covering the period from 1976 through 1993 Reid (2004) had 
similar results, with only 47 percent of low-income owners still owning their first homes 5 years later 
compared to 77 percent of high income owners (with incomes here defined based on average income in 
the years prior to homeownership compared to area median incomes). Reid further found that 
minorities had a harder time staying in their first home, with 42 percent of low-income non-whites still 
owning after five years compared to 54 percent of low-income whites. 
While these results raise clear concerns about the high risk of failed homeownership among 
these groups, the focus on a single homeownership spell may overstate the extent to which 
homeowning is not sustained in the long run. Haurin and Rosenthal (2004) also examine subsequent 
tenure experience in their panel and find that the share of households that return to owning a second 
time is very high for both whites and minorities. Over the 21 year period in their panel, 86 percent of 
whites who ever bought a home either never returned to renting or regained owning after a subsequent 
spell as a renter, with only slightly lower rates for blacks (81 percent) and Hispanics (84 percent). 
However, they do find that minorities spend more years in their intervening spells as renters, which 
reduces the overall amount of time they can accumulate benefits from owning. 
Another critical difference in the financial returns to owning for low-income households is that 
the ability to deduct mortgage interest and property taxes from federal taxable income may be of little 
or no value. In order to benefit from these tax provisions, the amount of available deductions must 
2 
Galster and Santiago (2008) provide a useful framing of this issues and a comprehensive review of the relevant literature. 
10 
exceed the standard deduction, which stood at $5,950 for individuals and $11,900 for married couples in 
2012. For taxpayers with lower valued homes, particularly married couples, the costs of mortgage 
interest and property taxes even when added to other deductions for state taxes and charitable 
contributions, may not greatly exceed the standard deduction. In addition, the value of these deductions 
depends on the taxpayer's marginal tax rate, which will lower for low- and moderate-income 
households. In fact the share of the total value of the mortgage interest deduction going to moderate 
income households is fairly small. According to estimates from the Joint Committee on Taxation (2013), 
only 3 percent of the total deductions went to filers with incomes under $50,000, 9 percent to those 
with incomes between $50,000 and $75,000, and 11 percent to those with income between $75,000 
and $100,000, leaving 77 percent of the benefit going to those earning above $100,000. To the extent 
that these tax benefits swing the financial scales in favor homeownership, this tilting of the calculus is 
not very evident for low- and moderate-income tax filers. 
There are also systematic differences in mortgage terms and characteristics by income and 
race/ethnicity that can also affect the financial returns to owning. The development of the nonprime 
lending industry that began in the 1990s and came to full blossom during the housing boom produced 
much greater variation in mortgage terms and pricing than had previously been evident. A fairly 
extensive literature has documented the greater prevalence of subprime lending among minorities and, 
to a lesser extent, low-income borrowers and communities (see, for example, Bradford, 2002; Calem, 
Gillen and Wachter, 2004; Apgar and Calder, 2005; Avery, Brevort, and Canner, 2007; Belsky and 
Richardson, 2010). As described above, higher costs of financing can significantly reduce the financial 
benefits of owning. While the expansion of financing options beyond a "one size fits all who qualify" 
approach to lending has the potential to extend homeownership opportunities to a greater range of 
households, there is significant evidence that the cost of credit was often higher than risk alone would 
warrant. Bocian, Ernst and Li (2008) present perhaps the most compelling evidence through an analysis 
of a large data set on nonprime loans that documents a wide range of risk measures, including credit 
scores as well as income and race/ethnicity. They find that even after controlling for observable 
differences in credit quality both blacks and Hispanics were significantly more likely to obtain high- 
priced mortgages for home purchase, while blacks were also more likely to obtain higher-priced 
refinance loans. These higher costs of borrowing not only limit the wealth producing capacity of 
homeownership, they also increase the risk of failing to sustain homeownership. In fact, Haurin and 
Rosenthal (2004) find that a 1 percentage point increase in the mortgage interest rate increases the rate 
of homeownership termination by 30 percent. 
11 
Low-income and minority borrowers are also less likely to refinance when interest rates decline. 
In an analysis of loans guaranteed by Freddie Mac during the 1990s Van Order and Zorn (2002) find that 
low-income and minority borrowers were less likely to refinance as interest rates fell. Their analysis also 
found that once borrower risk measures and loan characteristics were taken into account there were no 
remaining differences in refinance rates by income-although this just indicates that refinancing may be 
constrained by credit factors. Minorities, on the other hand, still had lower rates of refinancing even 
after controlling for these factors, suggesting that there were impediments to refinancing by these 
borrowers that were in addition to measurable credit factors. Nothaft and Chang (2005) analyze data 
from the American Housing Survey (AHS) from the late 1980s through 2001 and also find that minority 
and low-income owners were less likely to refinance when interest rates declined. These authors use 
their results to estimate the foregone savings from missed refinance opportunities, which are more than 
$20 billion each for black and low-income homeowners. 
To the extent that low-income and minority homebuyers may be more likely to purchase homes 
in poor condition they are also exposed to greater risks of high costs of maintenance and repair. 
Herbert and Belsky (2006) find that compared to whites, black and Hispanic first-time homebuyers were 
more likely to buy homes that were moderately or severely inadequate as characterized by the AHS- 
6.5 percent for blacks and 8.8 percent for Hispanics compared to 4.3 percent among whites. A similar 
gap was also evident between low- and high-income households. While there has been little study of 
the incidence of unexpected home repair needs, a study by Rohe and his colleagues (2003) of 
participants in homeownership counseling programs found a fairly significant incidence of the need for 
unexpected repairs. Roughly half of 343 recent homebuyers reported that they had experienced a 
major unexpected cost in the first few years after buying their home, with the most common problem 
being a repair to one of the home's major systems. 
Finally, there are also concerns that lower-income households and minorities may be more likely 
to purchase homes in neighborhoods with less potential for house price appreciation. This is a 
particularly salient issue for minorities given the high degree of residential segregation by race and 
ethnicity that continues to be evident in the US. However, Herbert and Belsky (2006) present a detailed 
review of this literature and conclude that "taken as a whole the literature indicates that there is no 
reason to believe that low-value segments of the housing market will necessarily experience less 
appreciation than higher-valued homes. In fact, at different points in time and in different market areas, 
low-valued homes and neighborhoods have experienced greater appreciation rates. Although the 
opposite is also true." (Page 76) The evidence about differences in appreciation rates by neighborhood 
12 
racial composition is less definitive. Here Herbert and Belsky (2006) conclude that "it does appear that 
homes in mostly black areas may be less likely to experience appreciation, but this conclusion is 
tempered by the small number of studies and the fact that they mostly analyzed trends from the 1970s. 
and 1980s, which may no longer be relevant" (page 77). 
Findings by Boehm and Schlottmann (2004) regarding differences in wealth gains from 
homeownership by race and income are instructive in this regard. They find that over the period from 
1984 to 1992 there was little difference in appreciation rates in the specific neighborhoods where 
minorities and low-income households lived. Instead, they found that differences in housing equity 
accumulation were tied to the lower valued homes and the shorter duration of ownership for lower- 
income and minority households. Thus, differences in appreciation rates may be less of a concern in 
whether housing leads to wealth accumulation than these other considerations. 
Re-assessing the Calculus of Wealth Accumulation through Homeownership 
As the above review has shown, there were significant concerns about the risks of 
homeownership as an investment well before the housing bubble burst. For critics of homeownership as 
a wealth building tool the experience of the housing bust was in many respects a confirmation of their 
fears. Still, there were several markets developments during the boom years that magnified these 
preexisting risks. Most notably there was a marked increase in the prevalence of riskier mortgages, 
including those calling for little or no documentation of income, adjustable rate loans that exposed 
borrowers to payment shocks from the expiration of initial teaser rates or reduced payment options, 
allowances for higher debt to income ratios, and greater availability of loans for borrowers with very low 
credit scores. Downpayment requirements also eased as loan-to-value ratios (LTVs) of 95 percent or 
more became more common and borrowers also used "piggyback" second mortgages to finance much 
of the difference between the homes' value and a conforming first mortgage at an 80-percent LTV. 
Not unrelated to the greater availability of mortgage credit, house prices also exhibited much 
greater volatility than in the past, with a dramatic increase in prices that greatly outpaced trends in both 
incomes and rents and belied an unsustainable bubble. The greater availability of credit also increased 
the opportunity for lower-income households to miss-time the market. Belsky and Duda (2002) found 
that during the 1980s and 1990s lower-valued homes were less likely to be transacted around market 
peaks, so buyers of these homes were less likely to buy high and sell low. They speculated that this was 
due to the natural affordability constraints that took hold as markets peaked. But during the boom of 
13 
the 2000s lower-valued homes experienced greater volatility in prices, arguably reflecting much greater 
credit availability at the peak than was true in past cycles (Joint Center for Housing Studies, 2011). 
However, there are good reasons to believe-or certainly to hope-that the conditions that 
gave rise to this excessive risk taking and associated housing bubble will not be repeated any time soon. 
The Dodd-Frank Act includes a number of provisions to reduce the degree of risk for both borrowers and 
investors in the mortgage market. The Qualified Mortgage (QM) is aimed at ensuring that borrowers 
have the ability to repay mortgages by requiring full documentation of income and assets, setting tighter 
debt to income standards, and excluding a variety of mortgage terms that expose borrowers to payment 
shocks. The Qualified Residential Mortgage (QRM) is aimed at ensuring greater protections for investors 
in mortgage backed securities by requiring the creators of these securities to retain an interest in these 
investments if the loans included in the loan pool do not conform to certain risk standards that 
essentially mirror those of the Qualified Mortgage. Dodd-Frank also established the Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau to fill a gap in the regulatory structure by creating an agency charged with looking out 
for consumers' interests in financial transactions. Beyond these regulatory changes, there is also a 
heightened awareness of the risks of mortgage investments on the part of private sector actors who 
have suffered significant financial losses with the bursting of the housing bubble. Regulatory changes 
aside, these private actors are unlikely to embrace riskier lending any time soon. The Federal Reserve 
and other federal regulators are certainly more attuned to the possibility of a bubble in housing prices 
and so are more likely to act in the event that signs of a bubble re-emerge. 
But even in the absence of the excessive risks of the last decade, homeownership will remain a 
risky proposition. Thus, at best, we may return to the market conditions that existed prior to the boom 
and the real risks that these conditions posed for investments in owner-occupied housing. In that 
regard, an assessment of experience in wealth creation through homeownership prior to the boom is 
relevant for what we might expect in the future. 
On the other hand it does seem likely-and arguably even desirable given how tight credit has 
become-that some greater degree of risk taking will emerge to make credit available to the many 
lower-income and lower-wealth households that would like to own a home. In fact, the QM standard of 
a total debt-to-income ratio of up to 43 percent does curtail the higher levels that became evident 
during the boom, but this cutoff still represents a liberalization from standards for conventional 
mortgages that prevailed in the 1990s. There may also have been a shift in consumer attitudes toward 
mortgage debt, with fewer households seeking to pay off mortgages over time and thus exposing 
themselves for longer periods to the risks associated with these leveraged investments. Over time, as 
14 
conditions return to normal and the market adjusts to new regulatory structures, we are likely to see 
mortgages originated outside of the QM and QRM boxes. In that regard, an assessment of the 
experience of homeowners through the boom and bust is instructive as a stress test of how likely 
homeownership is to build wealth under more extreme market conditions. 
The next two sections of the paper look to assess homeownership's potential for wealth building 
from these two perspectives. First by presenting a review of the literature assessing homeownerships' 
association with wealth building prior to the 2000s and then by analyzing data from the last decade to 
examine how homeownership was associated with changes in wealth through the turbulent conditions 
of the 2000s. 
Review of Previous Studies Assessing the Financial Returns to Homeownership 
As the discussion up to this point has intended to illustrate, whether owning a home will lead to 
the accumulation of wealth is the result of complex set of factors related to the choices that households 
make in buying their home and how these choices interact with market conditions both at the time of 
purchase and over time. This complexity makes it quite difficult to assess whether in practice owning is 
likely to be an effective means of increasing a household's wealth. A further complicating factor is that 
there is a substantial selection bias in who becomes a homeowner, as there is reason to believe that 
those who are most secure in their financial condition and most inclined to save are more likely to 
become owners. For this reason, comparisons of the wealth profiles of owners and renters may not be 
able to attribute any observed differences solely to the influence of homeownership on the ability to 
accrue wealth. 
There are two broad classes of studies that have attempted to assess the financial benefits of 
homeownership in light of these challenges. One group relies on simulations that compare the 
theoretical costs and benefits of owning and renting under a variety of assumptions about market 
conditions and household choices. A key appeal of these studies is that they essentially remove concerns 
about selection bias by assuming otherwise identical households operate under a consistent set of 
decision rules. They can also isolate the influence of specific factors to shed light on the paths that are 
most likely to make owning or renting financially beneficial. But while these studies highlight the 
potential financial returns to owning and renting, they do not capture how households are likely to 
actually behave in these situations and so leave open the question of whether the potential returns of 
these tenure choices are likely to be realized in practice. 
15 
Another group of studies rely on panel studies that track households over time to examine how 
choices about owning and renting are correlated with changes in wealth. The findings from this type of 
analysis provide evidence of whether in practice owners are more likely to accrue wealth than renters 
and how this experience differs by income and race/ethnicity. Where the theoretical comparisons of 
owning and renting also generally focus on a single spell of homeownership - that is, the financial 
outcome associated with the period between buying and selling a single home - panel studies can track 
households through multiple transitions in and out of owning to assess outcomes from a series of tenure 
choices over time. The main drawback of these studies is the lingering concern that owners may be 
inherently different from renters in ways that observable household characteristics cannot capture. 
Some of these studies employ statistical methods to try to control for this selection bias, although it is 
doubtful that these controls can fully account for these differences. 
Both classes of studies provide important insights into the opportunities and drawbacks of 
homeownership as a means of increasing household wealth. When viewed as a whole the findings from 
both streams of research help paint a clearer picture of whether and how homeownership may help 
foster wealth creation. The sections that follow highlight key findings from each of these literature 
strands. 
Simulations of the Financial Returns to Owning and Renting 
Beginning with Mills (1990) there have been a number of studies that have simulated the 
financial returns to owning and renting under a variety of assumptions to identify whether and under 
what circumstances owning or renting is likely to be more financially beneficial (Capone, 1995; Belsky, 
Retsinas, and Duda, 2007; Rappaport, 2010; Beracha and Johnson, 2012). While the studies differ in 
important respects, the general approach is to compare the "all-in" costs of owning - including 
mortgage interest, property taxes, insurance, maintenance, and transaction costs along with offsetting 
gains in property value - to the costs of renting a comparable housing unit. Either implicit or explicit in 
these comparisons is that renters save and invest both the initial investment that owners make in 
buying their homes as well as any annual savings in housing costs. 
There are a host of assumptions that underlie these calculations, but among the most influential 
factors are the estimate of rents as a share of house value, the length of time the home is owned, the 
basis for simulating trends in house prices and rents over time, and the treatment of income tax 
benefits. The studies differ in fundamental ways related to the range of assumptions tested and the 
method for comparing returns to owning and renting and, as a result, individually reach somewhat 
16 
different conclusions about which tenure choice is likely to be preferred. But collectively the studies 
lead to some general conclusions about the relative financial merits of owning and renting. 
Perhaps the most fundamental conclusion from these studies that runs counter to the prevailing 
sense that homeownership is a powerful source of wealth is that under a variety of conditions renting is 
often more likely to be a better financial choice than owning. Belsky, Retsinas and Duda (2007) compare 
owning and renting in four different market areas chosen to represent different degrees of price 
appreciation and volatility over the period studied from 1983 through 2001. They focus on holding 
periods of 3, 5 and 7 years during their window of study and report the share of different holding 
periods where owning results in higher financial returns than renting. Overall they find that in only 53 
percent of the 3-year holding periods would owning be preferred to renting. Increasing the holding 
period to 7 years-which allows for more time to work off the high transaction costs of buying and 
selling a home-only increases this proportion to 63 percent. Rappaport (2010) reaches a similar 
conclusion based on an analysis of national trends in market conditions between 1970 and 1999 and an 
assumed 10-year period of owning a home. He finds that owning a home unambiguously built more 
wealth in about half of the possible 10-year periods, renting was clearly better in another quarter and 
likely, but not unambiguously, preferred in the remaining periods. Finally, Beracha and Johnson (2012) 
come to a similar conclusion in an analysis of all possible 8-year holding periods given actual market 
conditions at both the national and regional level between 1978 and 2009. They find that between 65 
and 75 percent of cases renting offered greater opportunities for accruing wealth than owning, 
depending on whether renters employing a more conservative or aggressive investment approach. 
In parsing the findings of these studies, there are several factors that are the critical drivers of 
the results. Perhaps the most obvious is the importance of the timing of home purchase relative to 
market cycles in prices and interest rates. Depending on the future course of prices, rents and interest 
rates one or the other tenure would be strongly preferred at different points in time. The importance of 
timing may be most clearly demonstrated in Belsky, Retsinas and Duda (2007) when they consider 
different holding periods among owners. In general, it would be expected that longer holding periods 
should favor owning as more time is allowed to overcome high transaction costs, pay down additional 
principal, and ride out price cycles. Instead, they find that in most markets the likelihood of owning 
being preferred to renting was little changed by the holding period as short holding periods offered the 
possibility of catching only the upswing in prices while longer holds made it more likely that owners 
would share in some portion of a downturn. Only in Chicago, which did not experience such dramatic 
swings in prices, were longer holding periods found to be much more likely to benefit owning. 
17 
Still, the issue of holding period is an important consideration. The analysis by both Mills and 
Capone solved for the holding period that was needed for owning to yield a higher return than renting 
on the assumption that longer holding periods would always favor homeownership. In his base case 
scenario Mills found a holding period of slightly longer than 7 years was needed for owning to be 
preferred. The more recent studies that have showed the importance of market timing either assumed 
a single fixed holding period of 8 to 10 years (as in Beracha and Johnson and Rappaport) or a range of 
relative short holding periods (as in Belsky, Retsinas and Duda). If owning does become more favorable 
over a longer period of time - for example, slightly longer than 8 to 10 years - these assessments would 
not capture this. In fact, many households move in and out of homeownership over time so a more 
complete assessment of the financial implications of tenure choice would take into account multiple 
homeownership spells. While one spell of owning may yield low returns, if homeowning is sustained or 
resumed then the household may yet benefit from the next upswing. 
Another important factor driving the findings are assumptions made about rents as a share of 
house value. This ratio is difficult to estimate both because of systematic differences in the nature of the 
owner and renter occupied stock and because market values and rents are hard to observe 
simultaneously. How much renters have to pay to rent a comparable home is obviously a key driver of 
financial outcomes as it determines how much they can save annually by renting, thereby adding to 
their wealth. 
Mills (1990) found that among the variables used in his simulation, his results were most 
sensitive to the ratio of rents to house values as a single percentage point change up or down leading to 
fluctuations in the required holding period from 3 to 23 years. Capone (1995) built on Mills study to 
examine the rent-versus-buy decision specifically for lower income households. He makes note of the 
importance of the rent-to-price ratio assumption and argues that Mills assumption of 7 percent was well 
below the ratios observed in low-cost segments of the market, where ratios of 10 to 12 percent were 
more reasonable. Under Capone's assumption that renters faced much higher rents he found that 
owners only needed to hold onto their homes for about 3 years for owning to be preferred. 
In contrast, Belsky, Retsinas and Duda rely on rent to price ratios is in the range of 5 to 7 
percent, while the series used by Beracha and Johnson derived by Davis, Lehnert, and Martin (2008) 
appears to average about 5 percent. In both cases these assumptions are more favorable to renting than 
the assumptions used by either Mills or Capone. In recognition of the importance of this assumption, 
Rappaport structures his analysis to estimate the rent-to-price ratio that is the breakeven point between 
owning and renting. He then compares this estimate to what he feels is a plausible range for this ratio of 
18 
between 5 and 10 percent based on analysis of different market areas over time. At the higher end of 
this range owning would almost always be preferred, while the lower end leads to his conclusion that 
owning is clearly preferred to renting in only about half of the holding periods considered. In short, high 
or low values of this ratio can swamp other considerations, yet, as Rappaport demonstrates, pinning 
down actual values for this ratio is not an easy task. 
Several of the studies have examined the issue of whether tax benefits are important to 
whether owning makes more financial sense than renting. Mills assumes that owners can take full 
advantage of tax benefits at a 28 percent marginal rate. When he reduces the marginal rate to 15 
percent he finds that owning is never preferred. Capone, though, demonstrates, that this knife edge 
does not hold if a higher rent to price ratio is assumed. In his base case analysis, owners are only 
assumed to benefit from tax benefits if they exceed the standard deduction and since he assumes a 
much more modest house in keeping with his focus on lower-income households, the tax benefits are 
essentially non-existent. As a result, reducing the tax benefits in his analysis does not change his 
conclusion that owning is a better financial choice even after only a few years. Belsky, Retsinas and 
Duda also examine the importance of tax benefits for lower-income owners. Like Capone, they adjust 
the value of tax deductions to account for the size of the home purchased and the amount of the 
standard deduction. They also find that tax benefits by themselves generally do not change the calculus 
of whether owning beats renting financially. So while tax benefits are an important factor among higher 
income households, as Mills found, it has little effect on the calculus for lower-income households. 
Despite getting limited benefits from tax breaks under a variety of circumstances Capone and Belsky, 
Retsinas and Duda find that lower-income households can fare better financially by owning. 
Belsky, Retsinas and Duda also make a unique contribution by examining how the returns to 
homeownership are affected by higher mortgage costs. They examine two scenarios: one where owners 
face interest rates that are 2 percentage points higher than prime rates and another where they are 5 
percentage points higher. Under the first scenario, the likelihood that owning would be preferred to 
renting is decreased by moderate amounts (between 6 and 17 percentage points), while under the later 
scenario owning is rarely a better financial choice than renting. In short, they find that higher interest 
rates do reduce the financial appeal of homeownership, although the impact is most pronounced at 
extremely high levels. 
Lastly, and in some ways most critically, the finding that renting offers the potential for higher 
returns than owners depends in large part on renters taking steps to invest the annual savings in 
housing costs compared to renting. Building on Beracha and Johnson (2012), Beracha, Skiba, and 
19 
Johnson (2012) examine how variations in key assumptions regarding trends in prices, rents, interest 
rates, downpayment shares, and the returns available from alternative investments affect the buy 
versus rent financial calculus. They find that modifying most factors in isolation have only a moderate 
effect on whether renting is favored over owning. However, when they drop the assumption that 
renters actual invest any annual savings in housing costs on top of the initial downpayment they find 
that renting rarely results in higher wealth than owning. Thus, they find that the forced savings aspect 
of homeownership is of fundamental importance in determining whether owning will lead to greater 
wealth. 
This finding is echoed in the results of Boehm and Schlottmann (2004) who employ a somewhat 
unique approach to simulating the impact of homeownership on wealth accumulation. This study uses 
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to model the probability of moving in and out of 
homeownership on an annual basis over the period from 1984 through 1992. These same data are also 
used to estimate the house value that a household would opt for if a home were purchased in a given 
year. The estimated house value is then inflated based on house price trends in the census tract where 
the household resided to yield each household's expected gain in wealth from homeownership. This 
analysis finds that while minorities and low-income households do accrue wealth from homeownership, 
the amounts are much less than for higher income whites both because they own for fewer years and 
because they buy lower valued homes. But importantly, while the expected wealth accumulation among 
these households is less than that earned by higher income whites it is still positive. The authors also use 
the PSID to document that these same low-income and minority households essentially had no growth. 
in non-housing wealth over the same period. So in that regard the estimates of potential wealth created 
through homeownership were all the more important. 
Evidence from Panel Surveys about Wealth Accumulation through Homeownership 
As the findings from Beracha and Johnson (2012) and Boehm and Schlottmann (2004) suggest, 
the theoretical advantages of renting may not be realized if in practice renters do not take advantage of 
the opportunities afforded to them for saving and investing derived from the lower cost of renting. In 
contrast, studies making use of panel surveys that track households over time provide insights into the 
wealth accumulation associated with actual choices about renting and owning. These studies universally 
find that owning a home is associated with higher levels of wealth accumulation even after controlling 
for a range of household characteristics. While the gains are also consistently smaller in magnitude for 
lower-income and minority households, these studies also find that in contrast to owners similar renters 
20 
experience little or no gains in wealth. These findings hold even when steps are taken to account for 
selection bias in who becomes a homeowner. Although these methods may not fully account for the 
differences between owners and renters, there remains a strong case that homeowning does make a 
positive contribution to household balance sheets regardless of income or race/ethnicity. 
Haurin, Hendershott and Wachter (1996) was among the first studies to use panel survey data 
to track wealth trajectories associated with homeownership. The primary focus of this study was on the 
accumulation of wealth in anticipation of becoming an owner rather than how owning a home over time 
contributes to wealth accumulation, but their findings provide important insights into one way in which 
homeownership adds to wealth. They use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) to track 
young renters age 20 to 28 in 1985 through 1990 and observe both their annual wealth levels and the 
timing of any transitions into homeownership. They find that household wealth goes up markedly during 
the transition to homeownership, increasing by 33 percent on average in the year prior to buying a 
home and then more than doubling in the year they first own. When they examine factors that 
contribute to this jump in wealth they find that marrying makes a significant contribution along with an 
increase in hours worked and a slightly higher incidence of inheritance and gifts. Their results suggest 
that an important mechanism by which homeownership adds to wealth is through the incentive to save 
in anticipation of buying a home. Even before realizing any returns on the investment in the home itself, 
the drive to become an owner results in substantially higher wealth than those who remain renters. 
Adding to this effect Haurin and his colleagues also find that wealth increases more rapidly in the years 
after becoming a homeowner-by 17 percent on average annually among their sample. 
Reid (2004) uses panel data from the PSID for the period 1976 through 1994 to examine the 
financial outcomes of homeownership among low-income households who bought their first home at 
some point during this period (with low-income defined as those with incomes consistently below 80 
percent of area median income before first buying a home). She takes two approaches to examining the 
returns to homeownership for this group. First, she estimates the change in home values for both low- 
income and minority homeowners compared to higher-income and white owners. She finds that the 
rate of increase in home values for these groups was fairly modest, failing to beat the returns that would 
have been earned on an investment in Treasury bills over the same time. Reid then examines wealth 
holdings of households by tenure status at the end of her period of observation. She finds that while 
low-income and minority owners generally built much less wealth than higher-income and white 
households, the amount of their housing wealth was non-trivial and was many times larger than their 
other forms of wealth. Like Boehm and Schlottmann, she also finds that those who were renters at the 
21 
end of the period essentially held no wealth of any kind. Reid, however, does not undertake a 
multivariate analysis to control for other factors that may account for the differences between owners 
and renters. Nor does she factor in the impact of failed efforts at homeownership on wealth. But the 
fact that home equity accounts for such a large share of wealth among low-income and minority 
households points to the important role that owning a home played in fostering wealth accumulation. 
Di, Belsky and Liu (2007) was the first study to directly assess the relationship between 
homeownership and wealth accumulation over time while attempting to account for household 
characteristics and to include some measure of potential selection bias in who becomes an owner. The 
study uses the PSID to track households who were renters in 1989 through 2001 to observe transitions 
into and out of homeownership. The change in household wealth over time is then modeled as a 
function of starting wealth, a range of household characteristics thought to influence wealth, and, their 
principal measure of interest, the amount of time spent as an owner. In order to take into account a 
household's propensity to save, the study uses the PSID from 1984 through 1989 to estimate the share 
of income that was saved as an indication of savings behavior prior to the period when tenure 
transitions are observed as a means of controlling for this tendency in assessing differences in savings 
behavior after buying a home. Their principal finding is a positive and statistically significant association 
between additional years of homeownership and changes in wealth. The authors include a square term 
for the number of years owned to take into account anticipated impacts of the timing of moves into 
homeownership over the period as there was an initial decline in house values during the first years of 
their panel followed by more robust increases in later years. This square term is negative and significant 
indicating those who bought earlier in the period had lower cumulative gains in wealth. The largest 
estimated gains in wealth of $13,000 per year of ownership occurred among those who owned for 8 
years. But for those who owned for the maximum possible period of 12 years the gains were only 
$3,333 per year. Prior savings tendency was positively associated with increases in wealth as expected, 
but was not statistically significant and so did not appear to capture any important difference in 
household behavior that was not already accounted for by other explanatory variables. 
Turner and Luea (2009) undertake a very similar analysis using the PSID sample for the period 
from 1987 to 2001. In contrast to Di, Belsky and Liu who only include initial renters, their study sample 
includes all households in the sample as of 2001 that were age 65 or younger regardless of whether they 
were renters at the start of the period. The study pools observations for the sample on household 
wealth from three points in time: 1994, 1999, and 2001. For each observation they include a count of 
the number of years the household has owned a home since 1988 as their explanatory variable of 
22 
interest. The approach used in this study attempts to control for selection bias into homeownership by 
estimating a random effects model that includes a household specific constant term. Turner and Luea 
also separate the sample into two income classes to see whether the association between 
homeownership and wealth growth differs by income. Low- and moderate-income (LMI) households 
were those who had incomes below 120 percent of area median income in all three periods when 
wealth was observed. The results indicate that each year of homeownership is associated with nearly 
$14,000 in additional wealth, perhaps not surprisingly quite similar to the amount found by Di, Belsky 
and Liu using the same survey over a nearly identical period (although with a somewhat different 
sample). When controls are included for LMI status, Turner and Luea find that these households have 
somewhat lower wealth accumulation of between $6,000 and $10,000 per year. But they note that since 
the average wealth holding of LMI households in 2001 was about $89,000 this annual rate of increase 
accounts for a fairly sizeable share of total wealth. 
In an unpublished dissertation, Mamgain (2011) extends the work of Turner and Luea by 
employing a two-stage model to add stronger controls for selection into homeownership. Like most of 
the other studies, Mamgain also uses the PSID, but his period of observation is from 1999 through 2007. 
Despite the different time period examined, when he replicates Turner and Luea his analysis yields 
similar results regarding the magnitude of the association between homeownership and wealth 
(although by ending the study period in 2007 it does not include the sharp loss of both housing and 
financial wealth that followed 2007). When Mamgain adds additional controls to his model to capture 
the intention to move, the respondent's health status, their ownership of other real estate and an 
estimate of current LTV he finds a somewhat lower impact of additional years of owning, but the 
estimate is still significant and positive. Importantly, when he employs his two-stage approach to include 
both a selection term and an instrumental measure of current tenure his estimate of the impact of each. 
additional year on owning does not change. He also estimates separate models by income level and 
finds that there is no difference in the impact of owning across income classes—all are positive and 
significant. In short, like other studies he does not find a significant impact of selection bias on his 
findings and he also finds that low-income owners are also likely to benefit from owning homes. 
3 
3 He does differ from previous studies in how he estimates the contribution of owning to wealth gains, by focusing on impacts at much lower household wealth levels. He finds that assuming wealth of about $2,500 for the lowest income group (at or below 150 percent of the poverty level) owning a home only adds a few hundred dollars a year to the household's bottom line. But with total wealth set a level well below the median among owners in this income class this result seems implausible. 
23 
None of the studies estimating statistical models to assess the contribution of homeownership 
to wealth accumulation analyzed whether there were differences in this experience by race and 
ethnicity. As discussed above, there are significant racial and ethnic differences in residential location, 
size of home, and characteristics of financing used, all of which could contribute to differences in wealth 
outcomes. Shapiro, Meschede, and Osoro (2013) use the PSID from 1984 through 2009 specifically to 
examine the factors associated with more rapid growth in wealth among whites over this period 
compared to blacks. Tracking the same set of households over this period they find that gains in median 
wealth among whites exceeded those among blacks by $152,000. Based on the results of a multivariate 
analysis they found that the single largest driver of this divergence in wealth was the additional time 
whites spend as homeowners, which they estimate accounted for 27 percent of the additional white 
gains. The next most significant factors were differences in income (20 percent), unemployment spells (9 
percent), lower shares with a college education (5 percent), and differences in inheritance and financial 
support from family (5 percent). They also find that years of homeownership exerted a stronger 
influence on gains in wealth for blacks than it did for whites. While the authors do not attempt to 
control for any selection bias to control for who becomes a homeowner, none of the previous studies 
that have taken these steps have found these controls to change their findings. 
Conclusions Drawn from the Previous Literature 
Studies presenting simulations of the financial returns to renting and owning make a convincing 
case that in many markets over many periods of time and under a variety of assumptions renting ought 
to support greater wealth accumulation than owning. However, as virtually all of the panel studies 
document, in practice owning has consistently been found to be associated with greater increases in 
wealth even after controlling for differences in household income, education, marital status, starting 
wealth, inheritances, and other factors. Importantly, these same studies also consistently find that 
owning has a positive effect on wealth accumulation among both lower-income households and 
minorities, although the gains are smaller than for higher-income households and whites generally. 
Housing wealth among lower-income and minority households also often accounts a substantial share of 
total wealth for these groups. On the other hand, renters in these same demographic groups are 
consistently found to accrue little to no wealth over time. 
How can we reconcile the findings from simulation studies that renting should often be more 
financially advantageous than owning with the findings from the analysis of panel surveys that 
unambiguously find owning to be more favorable? One explanation may be that behavioral issues play 
24 
a key role. Efforts to save for a downpayment lead to a large jump in wealth that is then further 
supported by at least modest appreciation and some pay down of principal over time. Renters may have 
the opportunity to accrue savings and invest them in higher yielding opportunities but lack strong 
incentives and effective mechanisms for carrying through on this opportunity. There is also likely some 
degree of selection bias at work in who becomes a homeowner. While studies do control for income, 
education, marital status and other factors that would contribute in differences in the ability to save, 
there are likely differences in motivation and personal attributes that are related to both savings 
practices and whether someone becomes an owner. While controls included in studies to capture this 
effect have not diluted the association between homeownership and increases in wealth, this may 
simply reflect the challenge of capturing these difficult to measure factors. 
Studies using panel surveys may also make the benefits of homeownership appear more assured 
than they actually are by not fully capturing the impact of failed attempts at owning on changes in 
wealth. Studies to date have focused on measuring homeownership as the number of years spent as a 
homeowner, which does not distinguish between short sustained spells of owning from similar periods 
of owning that end in foreclosure or other financial distress. So while homeownership on average may 
increase wealth, it is undoubtedly the case that for some share of households owning a home had a 
negative impact on their balance sheet. 
Finally, the studies reviewed here may also not fully reflect changes that have occurred over 
time in both market conditions and household behavior. Most of the studies cited reflect experiences as 
owners during the 1980s and 1990s and so do not capture the market dynamics that began in the late 
1990s but came to full bloom during the boom years of the 2000s, including the much greater 
availability of and appetite for high loan-to-value loans, higher cost loans, sharp swings in house prices, 
and much higher risks of default even before the national foreclosure crisis began. The next section 
turns to an analysis of data from the 2000s to examine whether findings about homeownership's 
positive association with wealth accumulation held over this period, particularly for low-income and 
minority households who were most likely to have used high cost mortgage products. 
Experience with Homeownership and Wealth Accumulation through the Boom and Bust 
Given the substantial changes in the availability, cost and terms of mortgage financing that 
began in the 1990s and accelerated through the mid-2000s and the accompanying boom and bust in 
home prices, there is good reason to believe that the experience of homeowners in accumulating wealth 
over the last decade has been substantially different from what is documented in much of the existing 
25 
literature for earlier periods. In this section of the paper we present information on wealth 
accumulation through homeownership during the housing market boom and bust of the 2000s. 
In the first section, we present findings from the tri-annual Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF) to 
present a high level picture of the contribution of homeownership to household balance sheets over 
time. The SCF also provides insights into how a greater tendency both to use high loan-to-value (LTV) 
loans to purchase homes and to take cash out through refinancing may have reduced wealth associated 
with homeownership. While the SCF does document the substantial decline in housing wealth following 
the bust, it also shows that, despite these losses, average homeownership wealth is generally higher 
than it was in the mid-1990s and continues to represent a substantial portion of household wealth for 
minorities and lower-income households. The SCF also shows that while the degree of leverage in the 
housing market showed a marked increase in the years following the Tax Reform Act of 1986, the 
distribution of LTVs did not change a great deal between the mid 1990s and the housing boom years. 
However, the crash in housing prices did push LTVs to historic highs. 
We then turn to an analysis of the PSID for the period from 1999 to 2009 to examine how 
homeownership spells contributed to trends in household wealth over this period. While house prices 
grew substantially for much of this period, it also captures most of the decline in prices as well. Whereas 
previous studies have focused solely on how each additional year of homeownership contributes to 
household wealth, we are also interested in assessing how failed attempts at homeownership affect 
wealth to assess the downside risks of owning as well. We find that on average homeownership's 
contribution to household wealth over this period was remarkably similar to that found in earlier 
periods. The results also confirm previous findings that while lower-income households and minorities 
realized lower wealth gains from owning, on average these gains were positive and significant. The 
results also show that a failure to sustain homeownership is associated with a substantial loss of wealth 
for established owners, although those who made a failed transition from owning to renting are no 
worse off financially than those who remained renters over the whole period. Thus, despite the many 
ways in which market conditions over this period might have been expected to undermine 
homeownership's wealth building potential, our analysis of the PSID finds that owning maintained a 
strong association with improvements in wealth over the decade from 1999 to 2009. 
Long-Run Trends in Housing Wealth and Mortgage Debt 
The sharp rise in home prices in many parts of the country is reflected in the substantial increase 
in average real housing equity among homeowners, roughly doubling (a gain of 96 percent) between 
26 
1995 and 2007 among all homeowners (Table 1). The gains were nearly as large among African- 
Americans (88 percent) and even larger among Hispanics (123 percent), although generally lower among 
households in the bottom two income quartiles where home equity increased by only 56 and 42 
percent, respectively. The loss in housing equity between 2007 and 2010 was substantial, erasing 26 
percent of home equity on average for all homeowners and taking back much of the gains made since 
2001 for most groups. Mirroring their larger gains during the boom, Hispanics suffered the greatest loss 
of housing wealth, dropping by nearly half. Across income groups the declines were more moderate 
among those in the bottom half of the income distribution. 
But despite these substantial losses, average real home equity in 2010 was still higher on 
average than in 1995 for all of the groups shown, and in many cases considerably higher. Whites and 
those in the highest income quartile had the largest gains, with average home equity up by 51 percent 
and 78 percent respectively. African-Americans and the lowest income quartile also maintained 
substantial gains of 39 percent and 35 percent, respectively. Hispanics and those in the middle income 
quartiles made the least progress, with average home equity up by only 12 to 18 percent. 
Throughout this period the share of net wealth accounted for by home equity among all 
homeowners fluctuated between 22 and 29 percent, with much of the movement due to changes in 
non-housing net wealth. Between 1989 and 1998 home equity's share of average wealth fell from 29 to 
22 percent as the stock market boomed while home values languished. Between 1998 and 2007 home 
equity's share of net wealth rose to 25 percent as the stock market absorbed the dot com bust while 
housing prices soared. Between 2007 and 2010 losses in housing wealth outpaced losses in other 
financial assets so housing's share of wealth fell back to 22 percent. Thus, despite the significant growth 
in housing equity in the first half of the 2000s it never came to account for an outsized portion of 
household net wealth among all homeowners. 
