Obergefell v. Hodges:
Same-Sex Marriage Legalized
Rodney M. Perry
Legislative Attorney
August 7, 2015

Congressional Research Service
7-5700
www.crs.gov
R44143

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

Summary
On June 26, 2015, the Supreme Court issued its decision in Obergefell v. Hodges requiring states
to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples and to recognize same-sex marriages that were
legally formed in other states. In doing so, the Court resolved a circuit split regarding the
constitutionality of state same-sex marriage bans and legalized same-sex marriage throughout the
country. The Court’s decision relied on the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection and due
process guarantees.
Under the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause, state action that classifies groups of
individuals may be subject to heightened levels of judicial scrutiny, depending on the type of
classification involved or whether the classification interferes with a fundamental right.
Additionally, under the Fourteenth Amendment’s substantive due process guarantees, state action
that infringes upon a fundamental right—such as the right to marry—is subject to a high level of
judicial scrutiny.
In striking down state same-sex marriage bans as unconstitutional in Obergefell, the Court rested
its decision upon the fundamental right to marry. The Court acknowledged that its precedents
have described the fundamental right to marry in terms of opposite-sex relationships. Even so, the
Court determined that the reasons why the right to marry is considered fundamental apply equally
to same-sex marriages. The Court thus held that the fundamental right to marry extends to samesex couples, and that state same-sex marriage bans unconstitutionally interfere with this right.
Though the Supreme Court’s decision in Obergefell resolved the question of whether or not state
same-sex marriage bans are unconstitutional, it raised a number of other questions. These include
questions regarding, among other things, Obergefell’s broader impact on the rights of gay
individuals; the proper level of judicial scrutiny applicable to classifications based on sexual
orientation; what the decision might mean for laws prohibiting plural marriages; the Court’s
approach to recognizing fundamental rights moving forward; and the proper level of judicial
scrutiny applicable to governmental action interfering with fundamental rights. This report
explores these questions.

Congressional Research Service

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

Contents
General Constitutional Principles .................................................................................................... 1
Equal Protection ........................................................................................................................ 1
Substantive Due Process............................................................................................................ 3
The Supreme Court Invalidates State Same-Sex Marriage Bans in Obergefell ............................... 4
Implications of the Supreme Court’s Decision in Obergefell .......................................................... 6

Contacts
Author Contact Information............................................................................................................. 8

Congressional Research Service

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

O

n June 26, 2015, the Supreme Court issued its decision in Obergefell v. Hodges legalizing
same-sex marriage throughout the country by requiring states to issue marriage licenses
to same-sex couples and to recognize same-sex marriages that were legally formed in
other states. In doing so, the Court resolved a circuit split1 regarding the constitutionality of state
same-sex marriage bans.
This report provides background on, and analysis of, significant legal issues raised by the
Supreme Court’s decision in Obergefell. It first offers background on the constitutional principles
on which the Court relied in Obergefell to invalidate state same-sex marriage bans as
unconstitutional. Then, it walks through the Court’s opinion and rationale. Finally, it discusses
potential implications of the Court’s decision.

General Constitutional Principles
Equal Protection
Under the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause, “[n]o State shall … deny to any
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”2 Though there is no parallel
constitutional provision expressly prohibiting the federal government from denying equal
protection of the law, the Supreme Court has held that equal protection principles similarly apply
to the federal government.3 Under the Constitution’s equal protection guarantees, when courts
review governmental action that distinguishes between classes of people, they apply different
levels of scrutiny depending on the classification involved. The more suspect the government’s
classification, or the more likely that the government’s classification was motivated by
discrimination, the higher the level of scrutiny that courts will utilize in evaluating the
government’s action.4 Increased scrutiny raises the likelihood that a court will find the action
unconstitutional. Generally speaking, there are three such levels of scrutiny: (1) strict scrutiny; (2)
intermediate scrutiny; and (3) rational basis review.
Strict scrutiny is the most demanding form of judicial review. The Supreme Court has observed
that strict scrutiny applies to governmental classifications that are constitutionally “suspect,” or
that interfere with fundamental rights.5 In determining whether a classification is suspect, courts
consider whether the classified group (1) has historically been subject to discrimination; (2) is a
11

Previously, the Fourth, Seventh, Ninth, and Tenth Circuits had struck down state same-sex marriage bans under
equal protection or due process grounds after generally, though not uniformly, subjecting them to heightened levels of
judicial scrutiny. Bostic v. Schaeffer, 760 F.3d 352 (4th Cir. 2014); Baskin v. Bogan, 766 F.3d 648 (7th Cir. 2014); Latta
v. Otter, 771 F.3d 456 (9th Cir. 2014); Bishop v. Smith, 760 F.3d 1070 (10th Cir. 2014); Kitchen v. Herbert, 755 F.3d
1193 (10th Cir. 2014). Conversely, the Sixth Circuit had upheld state same-sex marriage bans and observed that such
bans warrant the lowest level of judicial review. DeBoer v. Snyder, 772 F.3d 388 (6th Cir. 2014).
2
U.S. Const. amend. XIV, §1.
3
See Bolling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497 (1954). More specifically, the Court has held that the Fifth Amendment’s
guarantee of “due process of the law,” applicable to the federal government, incorporates equal protection guarantees.
See id. at 500.
4
Compare City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S. 432 (1985) (holding that mental disability is not a
“quasi-suspect” classification, and thus is entitled to rational basis review), with Graham v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 365
(1971) (holding that classifications based on alienage are “inherently suspect,” and are subject to strict scrutiny).
5
See Mass. Bd. of Retirement v. Murgia, 427 U.S. 307, 312 (1976); see also Heller v. Doe, 509 U.S. 312, 319 (1993).

Congressional Research Service

1

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

minority group exhibiting an unchangeable characteristic that establishes the group as distinct; or
(3) is inadequately protected by the political process.6 There are generally three governmental
classifications that are suspect—those based on race, national origin, and alienage.7 When
applying strict scrutiny to governmental action, reviewing courts consider whether the
governmental action is narrowly tailored to a compelling government interest.8 The government
bears the burden of proving the constitutional validity of its action under strict scrutiny, and, in
doing so, must generally show that it cannot meet its goals via less discriminatory means.9
Intermediate scrutiny is less searching than strict scrutiny, though it subjects governmental action
to more stringent inspection than rational basis review. Intermediate scrutiny applies to “quasisuspect” classifications such as classifications based on gender10 or illegitimacy.11 When
reviewing courts apply intermediate scrutiny to governmental action, they determine whether the
action is substantially related to achieving an important government interest.12 As with strict
scrutiny, the government bears the burden of establishing the constitutional validity of its actions
under intermediate scrutiny.13
Rational basis review is the least searching form of judicial scrutiny, and generally applies to all
classifications that are not subject to heightened levels of scrutiny.14 For governmental action to
survive rational basis review, it must be rationally related to a legitimate government interest.15
When evaluating governmental action under rational basis review, courts consider the legitimacy
of any possible governmental purpose behind the action.16 That is, courts are not limited to
considering the actual purposes behind the government’s action.17 Additionally, the governmental
action needs only be a reasonable way of achieving a legitimate government purpose to survive
rational basis review; it does not need to be the most reasonable way of doing so, or even more
reasonable than alternatives.18 Accordingly, rational basis review is deferential to the government,
and courts generally presume that governmental action that is subject to such review is

6
See Lyng v. Castillo, 477 U.S. 635, 638 (1986); see also United States v. Carolene Prods. Co., 304 U.S. 144, 152 n. 4
(1938).
7
Graham, 403 U.S. at 371-72 (“… the Court’s decisions have established that classifications based on alienage, like
those based on nationality or race, are inherently suspect and subject to close judicial scrutiny.”).
8
Parents Involved in Cmty. Schs. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701, 720 (2007).
9
See Fisher v. University of Tex. at Austin, 133 S. Ct. 2411, 2420 (2014).
10
United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533 (1996); see Miss. Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 724 (1982).
11
Clark v. Jeter, 486 U.S. 456, 461 (1988) (“Between these extremes of rational basis review and strict scrutiny lies a
level of intermediate scrutiny, which generally has been applied to discriminatory classifications based on sex or
illegitimacy.”).
12
See Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 198 (1976); see also Clark, 486 U.S. at 461.
13
Virginia, 518 U.S. at 533; see Miss. Univ. for Women, 458 U.S. at 724.
14
See Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S at 440-42; see also Schweiker v. Wilson, 450 U.S. 221, 230 (1981).
15
See City of Cleburne, 473 U.S. at 440.
16
See Nordlinger v. Hahn, 505 U.S. 1, 15 (1992); see also Heller, 509 U.S. at 320.
17
See Nordlinger, 505 U.S. at 15; see also Heller, 509 U.S. at 320.
18
See Schweiker, 450 U.S. 221, 235 (1981) (observing that, under rational basis review, “[a]s long as the classificatory
scheme chosen by Congress rationally advances a reasonable and identifiable governmental objective, we must
disregard the existence of other methods of allocation that we, as individuals, perhaps would have preferred.”); see also
Heller, 509 U.S. at 320 (observing that under rational basis review, “a classification ‘must be upheld against equal
protection challenge if there is any reasonably conceivable state of facts that could provide a rational basis for the
classification.’”) (quoting F.C.C. v. Beach Commc’ns, Inc., 508 U.S. 307, 312 (1993)).

Congressional Research Service

2

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

constitutionally valid.19 Parties challenging governmental actions bear the burden of establishing
their invalidity under rational basis review.20

Substantive Due Process
The U.S. Constitution’s due process guarantees are contained within two separate clauses; one
can be found in the Fifth Amendment, and the other resides in the Fourteenth Amendment. Each
clause provides that the government shall not deprive a person of “life, liberty, or property,
without due process of law.”21 However, the Fifth Amendment applies to action by the federal
government, whereas the Fourteenth Amendment applies to state action.22
The Constitution’s due process language makes clear that the government cannot deprive
individuals of life, liberty, or property without observing certain procedural requirements. The
Supreme Court has interpreted this language to also include substantive guarantees that prohibit
the government from taking action that unduly burdens certain liberty interests.23 More
specifically, substantive due process protects against undue governmental infringement upon
fundamental rights.24 In determining whether a right is fundamental, Supreme Court precedent
looks to whether the right was historically and traditionally recognized, and whether failing to
recognize the right would contravene liberty and justice.25
The Supreme Court has held that governmental action infringing upon fundamental rights is
subject to strict scrutiny,26 and thus must be narrowly tailored to a compelling government
interest.27 Under strict scrutiny, the government must generally show that it has a “substantial”
and “legitimate” need for its action to be in furtherance of a compelling government interest.28 If
the government successfully establishes a compelling interest, its action cannot encumber
fundamental rights any more than is necessary to achieve the government’s need.29 Additionally,
the government could not have possibly taken alternative action that would similarly further its
interest while being less burdensome on fundamental rights.30 Otherwise, the government’s action
is not narrowly tailored to the government’s interest.31 The Supreme Court has recognized a
19

See Beach Commc’ns, Inc., 508 U.S. at 315; see also Murgia, 427 U.S. at 315.
Heller, 509 U.S. at 320 (noting that, when reviewing a governmental classification under rational basis review, a
governmental action is “presumed constitutional,” and the burden lies on the party attacking the governmental action to
establish the action’s unconstitutionality.).
21
U.S. Const. amend. XIV, §1; U.S. Const. amend. V.
22
See U.S. Const. amend. XIV, §1; U.S. Const. amend. V.
23
See Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 719-720 (1997).
24
See id.
25
See id. at 720.
26
See Reno v. Flores, 507 U.S. 292, 301-02 (1993).
27
Id. (observing that a line of Supreme Court cases interprets the Fifth Amendment’s and Fourteenth Amendment’s due
process principles to “forbid[] the government to infringe certain ‘fundamental’ liberty interests at all … unless the
infringement is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest.”).
28
San Antonio Indep. School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 98 (1973).
29
See Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 343 (1972).
30
Id. (“if there are other, reasonable ways to achieve [government interests] with a lesser burden on constitutionally
protected activity, a State may not choose the way of greater interference. If it acts at all, it must choose ‘less drastic
means.’”) (quoting Shelton v. Tucker, 364 U.S. 479, 488 (1960)).
31
See id.
20

Congressional Research Service

3

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

number of rights as fundamental, including the right to have children,32 use contraception,33 and
marry.34
In Obergefell, the Court considered whether the Fourteenth Amendment’s substantive due process
guarantees require states to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples and require states to
recognize same-sex marriages that were legally formed in other states.

The Supreme Court Invalidates
State Same-Sex Marriage Bans in Obergefell
The Supreme Court resolved a circuit split on the constitutionality of state same-sex marriage
bans, finding them unconstitutional in Obergefell v. Hodges. In doing so, the Court relied on the
Constitution’s due process and equal protection principles to hold that states must issue marriage
licenses to same-sex couples and recognize same-sex marriages that were legally formed in other
states.
The majority in Obergefell rested its decision upon the fundamental right to marry. The Court
observed that it has long found the right to marry to be constitutionally protected, though it
acknowledged that its precedent describing the right presumed an opposite-sex relationship.35
Even so, according to the Court, these cases have identified reasons why the right to marry is
fundamental,36 which apply equally to same-sex couples. 37 These reasons included (1) personal
choice in whom to marry is inherent in the concept of individual autonomy; (2) marriage’s unique
support and recognition of a two-person, committed union; (3) the safeguarding of children
within a marriage, as both same-sex couples and opposite-sex couples have children; and (4)
marriage as a keystone of the nation’s social order, with no distinction between same-sex couples
and opposite-sex couples in states conferring benefits and responsibilities upon marriages.38
Accordingly, the Court extended the fundamental right to marry to same-sex couples.
In holding that the fundamental right to marry includes same-sex couples’ right to marry, the
Court appeared to acknowledge its departure from precedent for determining whether a right is
fundamental—mentioned earlier in this report—which considers whether it is “deeply rooted in
this Nation’s history and tradition and implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.”39 The Court
observed that if rights were defined by who could historically use them, old practices could
continuously prevent new groups from exercising fundamental rights.40 As such, the Court found
that “rights come not from ancient sources alone. They rise, too, from a better informed
32

Skinner v. Okla., 316 U.S. 535 (1942).
Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965).
34
Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967).
35
Obergefell, 135 S.Ct. at 2598.
36
Id.
37
Id. at 2599.
38
Id. at 2599-2601.
39
Glucksberg, 512 U.S. at 720.
40
Obergefell, 135 S. Ct. at 2602 (“If rights were defined by who exercised them in the past, then received practices
could serve as their own continued justification and new groups could not invoke rights once denied.”).
33

Congressional Research Service

4

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

understanding of how constitutional imperatives define a liberty that remains urgent in our own
era.”41
After determining that the fundamental right to marry includes the right of same-sex couples to
marry, the Court also seemed to depart from precedent—and the approaches of courts of appeals
that relied on the fundamental right to marry to strike down state same-sex marriage bans—by not
applying strict scrutiny to such bans. As previously noted, courts generally subject governmental
action that infringes upon a fundamental right to strict scrutiny, requiring that the action be
narrowly tailored to a compelling government interest to be constitutional.42 The states had
argued two primary interests for their bans on same-marriage: (1) the desire to wait and see how
the same-sex marriage debate progresses before changing long-existing marriage norms; and (2)
incentivizing procreating couples to stay together during child rearing. However, the Court made
no mention of whether the state same-sex marriage bans at issue were narrowly tailored to these
justifications. Rather, the Court noted why these justifications were invalid without appearing to
apply any of the typical levels of judicial review (i.e., rational basis review, intermediate scrutiny,
or strict scrutiny).43
The Court held that both equal protection and due process guarantees protect the fundamental
right to marry, and that states can no longer deny this right to same-sex couples.44 Importantly, in
doing so, the Court did not hold that classifications based on sexual orientation warrant any form
of heightened scrutiny. In fact, the Court made no mention of the proper level of scrutiny
applicable to such classifications.
Some of the dissenting Justices in Obergefell thought that the majority exceeded the Court’s
proper role by removing the question of whether same-sex couples have the right to marry from
the democratic process, where, they stated, it is properly resolved.45 According to these Justices,
the five-person majority should not have resolved the hotly contested issue of same-sex marriage
for the entire country; such resolution should have come from the people.46 The dissenting
Justices also voiced concern with the majority looking beyond history and tradition to establish a
fundamental right contrary to Supreme Court precedent.47 According to the dissenting Justices,
the requirement that fundamental rights be rooted in tradition and history exists to prevent the
Court from imparting its policy decisions regarding which rights have constitutional protection.48

41

Id.
See Flores, 507 U.S. at 301-02.
43
See Obergefell, 135 S. Ct. at 2605-07.
44
Id. at 2604.
45
Id. at 2612, 2615 (Roberts, J., dissenting).
46
See id.
47
See id. at 2617.
48
See id.
42

Congressional Research Service

5

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

Implications of the Supreme Court’s Decision
in Obergefell
Although the Supreme Court answered questions surrounding the constitutionality of state samesex marriage bans in Obergefell, its decision raised a number of other questions. These include
questions regarding, among other things, Obergefell’s broader impact on the rights of gay
individuals; the proper level of judicial scrutiny applicable to classifications based on sexual
orientation; what the decision might mean for laws prohibiting plural marriages; the Court’s
approach to recognizing fundamental rights moving forward; and the proper level of judicial
scrutiny applicable to governmental action interfering with fundamental rights. This section
briefly explores these questions.
Obergefell raised questions about the decision’s broader impact on the rights of gay individuals—
that is, whether its rationale extends rights to gay individuals outside of the marriage context.
However, the decision appears limited to the marriage context. Although the majority opinion did
make reference to same-sex marriage bans implicating equal protection guarantees, its holding
rested entirely on such bans infringing upon the fundamental right to marry in violation of both
equal protection and due process guarantees. The Court did not mention whether classifications
based on sexual orientation are suspect or quasi-suspect, and thus warrant any form of heightened
scrutiny. If the Court had rendered such a holding, its decision would have arguably had broader
implications for the rights of gay individuals, as it would have potentially subjected all
governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation to a heightened form of judicial
scrutiny.
Prior to Obergefell, federal appeals courts were split regarding the proper level of judicial
scrutiny applicable to governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation. The U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (Ninth Circuit) has held that classifications based on
sexual orientation warrant heightened scrutiny, though it did not clarify whether this heightened
scrutiny was intermediate or strict scrutiny.49 The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
(Second Circuit) has similarly found that classifications based on sexual orientation are quasisuspect, and thus any governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation is subject to
intermediate scrutiny.50 Conversely, however, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
(Sixth Circuit) has held that governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation is
neither suspect nor quasi-suspect, and thus subject only to rational basis review.51
Because the Court’s decision in Obergefell rested on the fundamental right to marry—and
therefore seems limited to the marriage context—nothing in the opinion appears to resolve the
circuit split between the Second, Sixth, and Ninth Circuits regarding the correct level of scrutiny
applicable to classifications based on sexual orientation. Other lower courts will be left to grapple
with this issue in the future. This ambiguity leaves open the possibility that, moving forward,
circuit courts could either, like the Second and Ninth Circuits, apply heightened scrutiny to laws
that classify based on sexual orientation (e.g., laws that provide exemptions from antidiscrimination legislation for religious entities based on their objections to certain sexual
49

See Latta, 771 F.3d at 468.
Windsor v. United States, 699 F.3d 169, 185 (2nd Cir. 2012).
51
Davis v. Prison Health Servs., 679 F.3d 433, 438 (6th Cir. 2012).
50

Congressional Research Service

6

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

orientations), or could apply rational basis review to such laws like the Sixth Circuit. The fact that
some lower courts may apply heightened scrutiny to government action that classifies based on
sexual orientation where other courts may not is significant because, as discussed earlier in this
report, laws subject to higher levels of scrutiny are more likely to be found unconstitutional. As
such, this could create a situation wherein similar laws that classify based on sexual orientation
receive dissimilar outcomes when facing constitutional challenge, depending on the evaluating
court.
The Supreme Court’s decision in Obergefell also raised questions regarding whether the Court’s
rationale could potentially extend the fundamental right to marry to polygamy. In fact, Chief
Justice John Roberts, in his dissent in Obergefell, seems to suggest that the majority’s opinion
could lead to the legalization of plural marriages.52 However, the majority’s opinion seems crafted
so as to try to limit its reach to the same-sex marriage context, in a possible attempt to prevent its
rationale from extending the fundamental right to marry to plural marriages.
As previously discussed, the majority in Obergefell found that the four reasons why the right to
marry is fundamental apply equally to same-sex couples, and thus extended the fundamental right
to marry to same-sex couples. Some commentators have observed that there are distinctions
between plural marriages and same-sex marriages sufficient to prevent Obergefell’s rationale
from being extended to legalize plural marriage.53 Conversely, other commentators have observed
that parts of the Court’s opinion discussing why the fundamental right to marry includes same-sex
marriage (e.g., the majority’s consideration of individual autonomy and family) could potentially
provide basis for extending constitutional protections to plural marriages.54
Additionally, the majority in Obergefell seemingly departed from precedent for determining
whether a right is fundamental by looking beyond historical and traditional recognition. This
deviation from prior cases raises the possibility that, when determining whether a right is
fundamental in the future, the Court will consider how the right is viewed at the time, in addition
to its historical and traditional recognition. This could have the effect of expanding the number of
rights that are deemed fundamental for purposes of substantive due process protections.
Finally, the Court did not clarify which, if any, of the typical levels of judicial review (i.e.,
rational basis review, intermediate scrutiny, or strict scrutiny) it applied to state same-sex
marriage bans after finding that such bans interfere with same-sex couples’ fundamental right to
marry. Moving forward, this raises questions regarding the proper level of judicial scrutiny
52

See Obergefell, 135 S. Ct. at 2621 (“It is striking how much of the majority’s reasoning would apply with equal force
to the claim of a fundamental right to plural marriage.”).
53
See, e.g., Joanna L. Grossman and Lawrence M. Friedman, Is Three Still a Crowd? Polygamy and the Law After
Obergefell v. Hodges, JUSTIA, July 7, 2015, https://verdict.justia.com/2015/07/07/is-three-still-a-crowd-polygamy-andthe-law-after-obergefell-v-hodges (observing that, to win in court, polygamists must “convince a court that the
justification for allowing same-sex couples to marry applies with equal force to a person who wants multiple spouses,”
and questioning whether the four “main reasons for recognizing the right of same-sex couples to marry” apply to
polygamists); see also Richard A. Posner, The Chief Justice’s Dissent is Heartless, Slate, June 27, 2015,
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/the_breakfast_table/features/2015/scotus_roundup/
supreme_court_gay_marriage_john_roberts_dissent_in_obergefell_is_heartless.html.
54
See, e.g., William Baude, Is Polygamy Next?, N. Y. TIMES, July 21, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/21/
opinion/is-polygamy-next.html?mabReward=CTM&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&region=CColumn&module=
Recommendation&src=rechp&WT.nav=RecEngine; see also Jonathan Turley, The Trouble with the ‘Dignity’ of SameSex Marriage, Wash. Post, July 2, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/the-trouble-with-the-dignity-ofsame-sex-marriage/2015/07/02/43bd8f70-1f4e-11e5-aeb9-a411a84c9d55_story.html.

Congressional Research Service

7

Obergefell v. Hodges: Same-Sex Marriage Legalized

applicable to governmental action that infringes upon fundamental rights. Given that increased
scrutiny decreases the likelihood that a court will find government action constitutional, this
could create ambiguity regarding the degree to which the government can permissibly take action
that interferes with fundamental rights.

Author Contact Information
Rodney M. Perry
Legislative Attorney
rperry@crs.loc.gov, 7-5203

Congressional Research Service

8

