2.2.2 Harsh and unfair consumer credit contract terms
130. Consumer credit contracts (loans) may include all kinds of harsh and unfair terms.
These may include-
 allowance for the lender to repossess property without sufficient warning or
time to remedy a default;
 large early termination fees if a loan is repaid early or the borrower is late in
paying the loan instalments; or
 placing security over property with greater value than the borrower‘s liability
under the consumer credit contract.
131. Laws in some countries allow a borrower to apply to a court or tribunal to ask them
to strike out the harsh and unfair contract terms.
132. The Malaysian Financial Services Act and the Islamic Financial Services Act
prohibit lenders (ie Financial Service Providers) from engaging in conduct that is
deemed to be inherently unfair to financial consumers. The types of prohibited
business conduct are set out in Schedule 7 of the two Acts. The types of conduct
that are prohibited include-
 providing borrowers with misleading or deceptive information;
 intimidating or exploiting borrowers;
 restricting the freedom of borrowers to choose between financial services or
products available to them;
 engaging in collusive business practices
Schedule 7 Malaysian Financial Services Act and Islamic Financial Services Act
Prohibited business conduct includes:
1. Engaging in conduct that is misleading or deceptive, or is likely to mislead or
deceive in relation to the nature, features, terms or price of any financial service or
product.
2. Inducing or attempting to induce a financial consumer to do an act or omit to do
an act in relation to any financial service or product by—
 making a statement, illustration, promise, forecast or comparison which is
misleading, false or deceptive;
 dishonestly concealing, omitting or providing material facts in a manner which
is ambiguous; or
 recklessly making any statement, illustration, promise, forecast or comparison
which is misleading, false or deceptive.
49
133. In Australia, a court can reopen a contract that is ‗unjust‘. ‗Unjust‘ conduct means
conduct that is ‗unconscionable, harsh or oppressive‘. This includes
circumstances in which the terms of the document are unjust, or the lender‘s
conduct is unjust.
134. In determining whether the contract was unjust, the court may take into account:
 whether the lender or any other person used unfair pressure;
 whether, at the time the contract was entered into, the lender knew or should
have known that the borrower would be unable to pay; or
 the annual percentage interest rates charged in comparable cases.
135. If the court decides that the contract is unjust, then it can make order a number of
remedies, including:
 reopening an account already taken between the parties;
 relieving the borrower and any guarantor from payment of any amount that
the court considers to be excessive;
 setting aside either wholly or in part or revise or alter an agreement made
or mortgage given in connection with the transaction; or
 ordering that the mortgagee takes such steps as are necessary
to discharge the mortgage.