 Contact: Corporate Communications, USJ Co.
 81-6-6465-3333
US MEDIA GIANT, COMCAST NBCUNIVERSAL
TO PURCHASE 51% OWNERSHIP OF USJ CO., LTD.
OSAKA (Sept. 28, 2015) – USJ Co., Ltd., the operating company of Universal Studios Japan, announced today that
Comcast NBCUniversal agreed to purchase 51% of ownership of USJ from the current shareholders. This acquisition
will show the strong commitment of Comcast NBCUniversal to grow and evolve Universal Studios Japan and as we
work with NBCUniversal and its Universal Parks & Resorts division, the entire group’s global strategy in theme park
business will accelerate.
Also today, Glenn Gumpel, who served as Chief Executive Officer of USJ since 2004, announced to step down from
the current position effective when the transaction closes. Universal Parks & Resorts has named Jean-Louis Bonnier
as the new Chief Executive Officer.
Glenn Gumpel said, “Universal Studios Japan will continue to progress along with its basic policies such as the
successful marketing strategy which has boosted the attendance these recent years and look forward to even further
growth utilizing a financial strength and a great platform Comcast NBCUniversal will give.”
About Universal Studios Japan
Bring You the Best of the Worldas a theme park where its guests can have the world’s best experiences and create
the world’s best memories, Universal Studios Japan offers the world-class entertainment such as authentic attractions
and shows, based on not only Hollywood blockbusters but also very popular world class entertainment brands, and a
variety of seasonal events entertain its guests to the fullest fun.
In recent years, Universal Studios Japan has constantly offered new entertainment one after another such as
Universal Wonederland area where family guests enjoy meeting with popular characters, Universal Cool Japan event
offering attractions themed on world-renowned Japanese entertainment brands, and The Wizarding World of Harry
Potter which has been gathering attention of both domestic and international guests. These efforts resulted in not only
a record-high attendance made in FY 2014 but also positioning of the Park as a prominent entertainment and leisure
landmark drawing much greater number of guests from distant areas in Japan as well as overseas.
About Comcast:
Comcast Corporation (Nasdaq: CMCSA, CMCSK) is a global media and technology company with two primary
businesses, Comcast Cable and NBCUniversal. Comcast Cable is one of the nation's largest video, high-speed Internet
and phone providers to residential customers under the XFINITY brand and also provides these services to businesses.
About NBCUniversal:
NBCUniversal owns and operates a valuable portfolio of news and entertainment television networks, a premier motion 
picture company, significant television production operations, a leading television stations group, world-renowned
theme parks, and a suite of leading Internet-based businesses. NBCUniversal is a subsidiary of Comcast Corporation.
About Universal Parks & Resorts:
Universal Parks & Resorts, a unit of Comcast NBCUniversal, offers guests around the globe today’s most relevant and
popular entertainment experiences. With three-time Academy Award winner Steven Spielberg as creative consultant, its
theme parks are known for immersive experiences that feature some of the world’s most thrilling and technologically
advanced film- and television-based attractions.
Comcast NBCUniversal wholly owns Universal Studios Hollywood, which includes Universal CityWalk Hollywood. It
also owns Universal Orlando Resort, a world-class destination resort featuring two theme parks (Universal Studios
Florida and Universal’s Islands of Adventure), four resort hotels, and Universal CityWalk Orlando. Comcast
NBCUniversal also has license agreements with Universal Studios Japan in Osaka, Japan and Universal Studios
Singapore at Resorts World Sentosa, Singapore. In addition, Comcast NBCUniversal has recently announced plans for a
theme park in Beijing and an indoor theme park to be developed as part of the Galactica Park project in Moscow.
＊ ＊ ＊
Universal Studios Japan aims for the world’s best entertainment, a place where memories that lasts a lifetime are
made.
Please call the information center （Tel : 0570-20-0606） for any general information in regards to Universal
Studios Japan. The Official Universal Studios Japan website can be accessed via computer, cell phone and smart
phone.
＊ ＊ ＊