4.5. Treatment of asthma is aimed at prevention of troublesome symptoms, enabling levels of activity and lifestyle that are as normal as possible, maintaining the best possible level of lung function and preventing recurring attacks, in particular those that are severe or life threatening.
4.6. Treatment strategy is complex and includes procedures for avoidance of allergens or environmental provocation of attacks, and drug treatment with a variety of therapeutic agents.
4.7. Drug treatment. This involves the use of several types of drugs by varying methods of delivery. Evolving research has regularly produced new preparations over recent years.
4.7.1. The mainstay of treatment that is responsible for more than 90% of prescriptions for asthma is the use of inhaled β2-adrenoreceptor agonists, which mimic the bronchodilator action of adrenaline, and inhaled corticosteroids, which reduce the inflammatory response in the bronchial mucosa. These are used either separately or in combined preparations. The inhaled β2-agonists generally are used intermittently as “relievers” to abort an acute attack whereas inhaled corticosteroids are used regularly in the longer term for prevention. Inhalation therapy is given by a variety of methods using aerosol, dry powder or nebulisation. The use of “spacer” devices can facilitate delivery of aerosol preparations. Longer acting β2-agonists such as salmeterol and formaterol are now available to enhance control but these drugs should be used separately.
4.7.2. Oral β2-agonists may be used in more difficult cases and oral corticosteroids may be used to resolve a more severe attack. Long-term use of oral corticosteroids is avoided in most cases because of the potentially serious
systemic side effects.
4.7.3. Other bronchodilator drugs such as the methylxanthines (e.g. theophylline and its derivatives) may be used. Several other substances such as sodium
cromoglycate, nedocromil sodium, ipratropium, and more recently leukotriene
receptor antagonists have been added to the armamentarium for managing
difficult asthma.
4.7.4. The British Thoracic Society has produced a set of guidelines for the
management of asthma which describe five steps of drug treatment depending
on severity and individual response to treatment. Severity is based on a
generally accepted scale which is broadly similar to that quoted at section 2.8.17
The five steps are:
•	Step 1 - mild intermittent asthma. Short acting β2-agonist inhalers needed less than once a day
•	Step 2 - mild persistent asthma. Regular anti-inflammatory treatment such as inhaled corticosteroids, sodium cromoglycate or nedocromil
•	Step 3 - moderate persistent asthma that has failed to be controlled at step 2. The addition of long-acting β2-agonist combined with inhaled low dose corticosteroid
•	Step 4 - severe persistent asthma. The combination of treatment at step 3 with high dose inhaled steroid and the addition of theophylline or leukotriene receptor antagonist
•	Step 5 - severe persistent asthma not controlled at step 4. The addition of oral corticosteroids
4.8. Most patients treated in the community are at step 1-2 while those needing steps 3-5 represent less than 5% of patients. Approximately 1.2 million people in the UK suffer regular restriction of activity.5  The step of treatment needed for control in an individual can be a useful guide to the severity of asthma, although some who are well controlled at a higher step may be less disabled than others who need a lower step but who comply poorly with treatment.
4.9. Airways remodelling. Chronic long-term asthma, particularly where treatment has been inadequate or compliance poor can result in permanent change in the structure of the air passages, which may lead to permanent loss of lung function with loss of the normal feature of reversibility. Airways remodelling may also contribute to the bronchial hyperresponsiveness seen in more severe asthma despite treatment with corticosteroids.
4.10. Management of asthma must involve active support of the patient with advice and information as well as surveillance of the clinical state and adjustment of treatment. An understanding of the aims of the treatment regime is essential to maintain compliance, particularly at times when symptomatically improved.
