The Eighth Amendment provides, “Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.” The Eighth Amendment’s prohibitions apply to laws enacted by
the federal government, and by state governments and their local subdivisions by operation of the
Fourteenth Amendment.
The Supreme Court has interpreted the Amendment’s prohibition on cruel and unusual punishments to,
among other things, impose some “substantive limits on what the government may criminalize.” Before
Grants Pass, the Supreme Court had issued two primary cases elaborating on the Eighth Amendment’s
substantive limits on what a government may criminalize: Robinson v. California and Powell v. Texas.
In Robinson v. California, a 1962 case, the Court heard an Eighth Amendment challenge to a California
law that made it a misdemeanor offense for an individual to “be addicted to the use of narcotics.” The
defendant was convicted under the law; however, at the time of his arrest, he “was neither under the
influence of narcotics nor suffering withdrawal symptoms.” The Supreme Court reversed the conviction
and expressed concern that the defendant was convicted on the basis of his “status,” specifically that he
suffered from the “chronic condition . . . of [being] addicted to the use of narcotics.” Put differently, the
Court was troubled that the defendant was not convicted “upon proof of the actual use of narcotics.” The
majority thus ruled that, under the Eighth Amendment, an individual may not be punished for a status or
in the absence of some conduct (or “actus reus”).
Six years after Robinson, the Court issued its opinion in Powell v. Texas, a case involving an Eighth
Amendment challenge to a law that proscribed public intoxication. The defendant argued that because he
was a chronic alcoholic, being intoxicated in public was “not of his own volition.” While the case
produced multiple opinions, the plurality determined that “Texas has sought to punish not for a status, as
California did in Robinson,” but rather “for public behavior which may create substantial health and
safety hazards, both for [the defendant] and for members of the general public.” That is, the plurality
indicated that the law at issue criminalized conduct, not status, which it viewed as permissible.
In his concurring opinion in Powell, Justice Black stated that Robinson established a status-conduct
distinction, forbidding punishment when the individual has not committed a “wrongful act.” Justice White
also concurred in the result. Citing Robinson, Justice White opined that “[i]f it cannot be a crime to have
an irresistible compulsion to use narcotics, I do not see how it can constitutionally be a crime to yield to
such a compulsion.” He thus suggested that an individual may not be punished for conduct symptomatic
of or compelled by an addiction. Justice White, however, concluded that the record did not support a
finding that the defendant could not avoid being in public while intoxicated. Accordingly, Justice White
was not prepared to “say that the chronic alcoholic who proves his disease and a compulsion to drink is
shielded from conviction [for] the [additional] act of going to or remaining in a public place.”
Four Justices dissented. They contended that the defendant was “powerless” to drink, had an
“uncontrollable compulsion to drink to the point of intoxication,” and that once in this state “he could not
prevent himself from appearing in public places.” In other words, they suggested that, here, drinking and
appearing in public were both involuntary acts making criminal punishment inappropriate. 