Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) face an assortment of social, emotional, and mental challenges. Typically, individuals with ASD have different and unexpected communication styles, difficulty recognizing others’ social cues, discomfort when making eye contact, delayed speech and unusual speech styles, and a preference for narrow or extreme groups of interests (Lai, Lombardo, Baron-Cohen, & Simon, 2014). Notable strengths can include an ability to focus on details, a perseverance for completing tasks, and an aptitude in following rules or instructions. While little is understood about the origins of autism, there is evidence to suggest atypical brain development and organization that may be related to genetic and environmental factors (Chaste & Leboyer, 2012). The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2018) reported that in 2014 one out of every fifty-nine individuals was identified with ASD, in contrast to the 1:150 ratio in the year 2000. More recently, research has revealed an even higher uptick, reflecting occurrences as high as one in 40 individuals having ASD (Kogan et al., 2018). Since 2006, when ASD screening became recommended, the familiarity and acceptance of the disorder has grown, leading to a spike in diagnoses in recent years (Wright, 2017). Although ASD has numerous subtypes, many studies depict how females with ASD are characteristically different than their male counterparts across the spectrum. Females with ASD have not only demonstrated a different set of mannerisms, but also face a variety of unique challenges. Females are often under-recognized on the spectrum and are three to four times less likely to be diagnosed with autism than males (Loomes et al., 2017). Males, on the other hand, not only dominate the autism spectrum in numbers, but also in the amount of research done on ASD. This brings into question whether males are more likely to develop ASD or if there is a diagnostic gender bias causing females to be underdiagnosed (Gould & Ashton-Smith, 2011). In this paper, I will evaluate the literature that examines the specific, gender-unique challenges that females with ASD experience. I will be discussing the underdiagnosis of females with ASD, the higher risk of sexual abuse for females with ASD, and the frequent development of secondary mental health concerns in females with ASD.

Females with Autism are Underdiagnosed Females with ASD often go undiagnosed or receive a late diagnosis (Mandic-Maravic et al., 2015). An accurate and early diagnosis for individuals with ASD is essential to optimize their social and emotional development (Milner, McIntosh, Colvert, & Happé, 2019). Baldwin and Costley (2016) found that females who did not receive a diagnosis until the age of 18 or older were far more likely to struggle later in life because of the lack of necessary assistance and treatment they could have received in their adolescent years. In this section, I will discuss two common explanations as to why females may be underdiagnosed: camouflaging and differences in presentation than males. Camouflaging Females with ASD are able to camouflage their autistic traits better than males with ASD (Lai et al. 2011). Camouflaging is defined as presenting and behaving oneself as neurotypical in order to fit into society (Milner et al., 2019; Schuck, Flores, & Fung, 2019). Mimicking behaviors, communicating nonverbally, reducing strange behaviors around others, and preparing small talk or “scripts” beforehand are ways females attempt to camouflage (Hull et al., 2017). In one study, women and girls reported to successfully hide their autistic traits by learning stock phrases or studying the appropriate amount of time they needed to maintain eye contact in order to appear normal in conversation (Lai et al., 2019). In another study, some females with autism reported that they camouflage in order to connect with friends, go on dates, get out of the spotlight, get a job, or simply be seen as neurotypical (Hull et al., 2017). Researchers presented a questionnaire to individuals with ASD and found that 89.2% of males with ASD and 90.9% of females with ASD attempt to camouflage their autism in order to fit in (Cassidy, Bradley, Shaw, & Baron-Cohen, 2018). Though both females and males try to hide autistic traits, females attained much higher scores, indicating that they are more adept at camouflaging and do so in more situations than males (Lai et al., 2011). Differences in presentation from males Autistic traits manifest differently between males and females with ASD, which subsequently causes false negative results in females being evaluated 