International Tax Reform
Canada is one of 138 members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)/Group of 20 (G20) Inclusive Framework on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (the Inclusive Framework) that have joined a two-pillar plan for international tax reform agreed to on October 8, 2021. The historic “Statement on a Two-Pillar Solution to Address the Tax Challenges Arising from the Digitalisation of the Economy” (the October 2021 Statement) agreed to on that day has since been endorsed by G20 Finance Ministers and Leaders.
Pillar One is intended to reallocate a portion of taxing rights over the profits of the largest and most profitable multinational enterprises (MNEs) to market countries (i.e., where their users and customers are located). Pillar Two is intended to ensure that the profits of large MNEs are subject to an effective tax rate of at least 15 per cent, regardless of where they are earned.
The following provides an update on recent developments and upcoming implementation steps in relation to the pillars.
Pillar One – Reallocation of Taxing Rights
Pillar One is an update to the framework that underlies current tax treaties, which allocates the income of MNEs between countries for tax purposes. The existing framework relies on principles of connection with a country based on physical presence that were designed for traditional bricks-and-mortar businesses; they do not produce appropriate results in today’s digitalized economy. Pillar One instead uses a broader test of connection and a formulary allocation of residual profits to ensure that the largest and most profitable MNEs pay a fair share of tax in the countries where their users and customers are located.
The government is working with its international partners in an OECD-led process to develop the model rules and the multilateral convention needed to establish this new multilateral tax framework and bring it into effect. To help ensure that the final rules will be effective and administrable, the OECD has been releasing draft model rules for public comment as each element reaches maturity. The draft rules were consolidated in two major progress reports released in July and October of 2022.
Countries are working toward completing multilateral negotiations so that the convention to implement Pillar One can be signed by mid-2023, with a view to it entering into force in 2024.
To ensure that Canadians' interests are protected, the government released draft legislative proposals for a Digital Services Tax (DST) in December 2021. The government intends to release a revised draft of the legislative proposals for public comment before introducing a bill in Parliament. Consistent with the October 2021 Statement, the DST could be imposed as of January 1, 2024, but only if the multilateral convention implementing the Pillar One framework has not come into force. In that event, the DST would be payable as of 2024 in respect of revenues earned as of January 1, 2022. It remains the government’s hope and underlying assumption that the timely implementation of the new multilateral framework will make this unnecessary.
Pillar Two – Global Minimum Tax
Pillar Two is a multilateral framework for a global minimum tax regime that is designed to ensure that MNEs with annual revenues of €750 million or more are subject to a minimum effective tax rate of 15 per cent on their profits in every jurisdiction in which they operate. It is intended to reduce the incentive for MNEs to shift profits into low-tax jurisdictions and, at the same time, end the “race to the bottom” in international corporate taxation by setting a floor on tax competition.
The primary charging rule for Pillar Two is known as the Income Inclusion Rule (IIR). In general terms, if the jurisdiction where the ultimate parent entity of an MNE is located has implemented the IIR, it has the primary right to impose a top-up tax on the ultimate parent entity with respect to income from the MNE’s operations in any jurisdiction where it is taxed at an effective tax rate below 15 per cent. 
Pillar Two also contains a “backstop” rule, known as the Undertaxed Profits Rule (UTPR). If a parent jurisdiction of an MNE has not implemented the IIR, other jurisdictions in which the MNE operates that have implemented the UTPR would impose the top-up tax on the group entities located in their jurisdiction, with the top-up tax being allocated among those jurisdictions on a formulary basis. This ensures that MNEs whose parent entities are located in non-implementing jurisdictions are nonetheless subject to top-up tax in respect of their low-taxed income.
The details of the IIR and UTPR are set out in the model rules (the Global Anti-Base Erosion or GloBE Rules), and related commentary and administrative guidance, all agreed by the Inclusive Framework.
The Pillar Two framework contemplates that a jurisdiction may enact a domestic minimum top-up tax that would apply a top-up tax on low-taxed income of its domestic entities. If such a tax is designed to achieve the intended outcomes under Pillar Two, it is treated as a “qualified” domestic minimum top-up tax and is creditable dollar-for-dollar against the top-up tax liability that would otherwise arise under Pillar Two. In effect, this allows a jurisdiction to collect the top-up tax applicable to any low-taxed income of its domestic entities, rather than allowing the top-up tax to accrue to the treasuries of other countries under the IIR or UTPR.
A more detailed outline of the Pillar Two framework is set out in the Supplementary Information to Budget 2022 (https://www.budget.canada.ca/2022/report-rapport/tm-mf-en.html#a4), which launched a public consultation on the implementation of Pillar Two in Canada, which ended on July 7, 2022.
