Several different federal laws protect workers from discrimination based on pregnancy. The
oldest of these, the Pregnancy Discrimination Act (PDA), generally protects job applicants and
employees from adverse action—for example, firing, demotion, refusal to hire, or forced leave—
because of pregnancy or related conditions. The PDA also addresses harassment based on
pregnancy and bans retaliation against workers for making complaints about pregnancy
discrimination. Pregnancy-related conditions can include fertility treatments, medical
complications, delivery, postpartum conditions, and lactation. The PDA was enacted as an
amendment to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which protects against sex discrimination (as well as certain other
forms of discrimination) in employment.
As construed by the Supreme Court, the PDA does not generally require employers to make changes in working conditions to
accommodate pregnant workers unless employers provide accommodations to other similarly situated nonpregnant workers.
So while employers cannot fire workers for being pregnant, this statute (depending on the facts) may not require them to
make workplace changes (e.g., scheduling flexibility, an extra bathroom break) simply because employees’ demands are
pregnancy-related.
The Pregnant Workers Fairness Act (PWFA), passed in 2022 and effective June 27, 2023, mandates additional protections for
pregnant workers. Modeled on the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), it requires employers to modify workplace
conditions where needed to accommodate pregnancy-related conditions as long as an accommodation is reasonable and does
not present an undue hardship to the employer. The PWFA requires a reasonable accommodation, after a case-specific
assessment, even if a pregnancy-related condition does not amount to a disability, and even if the accommodation includes
reassignment of an essential job function. Relief from an essential job function is only required, however, if it is temporary.
In addition, under the PWFA, an employer may not require an employee to take leave if a reasonable accommodation would
allow her to keep working.
Some pregnant people face pregnancy-related impairments serious enough to satisfy the ADA’s definition of a “disability”
and may, along with any PDA or PWFA claims, bring ADA claims for accommodations. Separately, many workers can
invoke the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) for unpaid leave for pregnancy-related medical needs. After childbirth,
provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) entitle most nursing mothers to appropriate breaks and accommodations
for expressing breast milk.
Preceding the passage of the PWFA, many advocates and legislators proposed expanding legal protections for pregnancy.
Proposals included new pregnancy accommodation requirements (modeled on disability law), antidiscrimination measures
(expanding current statutes), and leave entitlements (in line with many analogous mandates for reemployment rights or leave
entitlements to protect workers engaged in endeavors such as military service). The PWFA focused on this first approach:
accommodations. In addition, many states have strengthened rights for pregnant workers in recent years, and the PWFA does
not preempt those laws when they offer greater protection. 