Other Sources of Data and Information
Sizing up the U.S. government’s reliance on foreign goods faces similar challenges in data limitations.113 The U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) maintains a database, the Federal Procurement Data System-Next Generation (FPDS-NG, or FPDS), where federal agencies are required to report procurement contracts whose estimated value is $10,000 or more.114 The procurement data in FPDS-NG are not fully reliable. There are documented quality issues documented relating to accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of its data.115 These limitations have prompted many analysts to rely on FPDS-NG data primarily to identify broad trends and produce rough estimates, or to gather information about specific contracts. With these limitations in mind, FPDS-NG data may provide general information regarding the value, quantity, and types of domestic and foreign-made goods hat U.S. government agencies procure.
Other information on domestic capacity, as well as changes resulting from increased production in the aftermath of the COVID-19 outbreak, generally comes from private research firms, news outlets, and trade associations. Many of the figures cited are often based on surveys, firms’ press releases, or firms/industries’ forecasts, which may differ significantly from actual production.
China’s Economic Recovery: Prospects and Implications
China’s leaders have focused on resuming manufacturing production to jumpstart economic growth.116 At an executive session of China’s cabinet, the State Council, on March 17, 2020, Chinese officials emphasized the importance of stabilizing employment and announced that the government would streamline business approvals and fast-track approvals for large infrastructure projects. They also offered government support to alleviate shortages of labor, raw materials, funds, and protective gear.117 To facilitate economic activity, the Chinese government also appears
Congressional Research Service 38
to have liberalized company health requirements and lifted intra-provincial and intra-city travel and transportation restrictions. NDRC spokesperson Meng Wei said on March 17, 2020 that transportation was operating normally. Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and Shanghai were operating at close to 100% of normal capacity; and over 90% of large-scale industrial companies outside of Hubei had resumed production.118 Company reports of opening and resumption of operations did not necessarily mean that these facilities were fully online or operating at pre-crisis levels, however. Several economic analysts and news outlets, including the Financial Times, published alternative measures of business resumption rates using proxies for economic activity—such as data on traffic congestion, air pollution levels, and container freight movement. Overall, many of these measures suggested that businesses across China did not return to full capacity at the rates reported by local and provincial governments.119 In Wuhan, the center of the original outbreak, the Hubei provincial government issued a notice in March—that applies to Wuhan as Hubei’s capital—allowing certain companies to resume work ahead of other production. This included companies in the medical and health industry, as well as companies producing protective gear, disinfectant, daily necessities, agriculture, and products critical to national and global supply chains.120
China emerged in June 2020 as the first major country to announce a return to economic growth since the outbreak of COVID-19, but consumption lagged production recovery and the economic recovery has relied on government spending and exports to boost growth. The government reported 3.2% gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the second quarter and 4.9% GDP growth in the third quarter of 2020.121 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects China’s economy to grow by 1.9% in 2020. China since February 2020 has provided an estimated $506 billion in stimulus and increased the government’s budget deficit target to a record high of 3.6% of GDP, up from 2.8% in 2019. Shifting from efforts to reduce debt, the government announced the issuance of $142.9 billion of special treasury bonds for the first time since 2007; increased the quota for local government special bonds (a source of infrastructure funding); and fast-tracked issuance of corporate bonds to cover pandemic costs, but with potential broader uses. The IMF estimates that the fiscal measures and financing plans announced amounted to 4.1% of the China’s GDP, as of July 2020.122 China’s National Bureau of Statistics in November 2020 recorded a 5% year-on-year increase in retail sales, a 2.6% year-on-year increase in fixed asset investment, and a 7% year-on-year increase in value-added industrial output.
COVID-19: China Medical Supply Chains and Broader Trade Issues
Congressional Research Service 39
in investment in industrial output growth, however, was recorded in non-ferrous metals and real estate investment, not broader areas of domestic consumption.123
China Positioning to Export
China’s economy depends on exports and the foreign exchange it earns through exports, as well as on the large productive role that foreign firms play in the domestic market and as exporters. Seeking to stabilize drops in foreign investment and trade, on March 12, Commerce Vice Minister Wang Shouwen held a call with 400 members of the American Chamber of Commerce in China, and on March 13, he held a similar webinar with the European Chamber of Commerce in China’s Advisory Council. Vice Minister Wang pressed companies to reopen operations and increase investments in China. Other Chinese agencies represented included NDRC, MIIT, the National Health Commission, the General Administration of Drug Supervision, the State Administration for Market Regulation, the General Administration of Customers, the Civil Aviation Administration of China, the Ministry of Transportation, and the State Taxation Administration.124
During past crises, such as the global financial crisis of 2008-09, China has pressed firms to idle facilities and keep them production-ready (instead of shuttering them) and retain workers (instead of laying them off) to maintain social stability and facilitate efforts to quickly ramp up production and exports later.125 These stimulus efforts are sometimes less visible than fiscal policies in other countries. Several market watchers have noted that, while a 17% drop in Chinese exports in January-February 2020 was significant, it was not as dramatic when considering China’s economy was shuttered for much of February. This indicates that Chinese industry may have had sufficient stock already at ports for export when the crisis hit. This also signals how China was able to resume an export push in the third quarter of 2020.126
China’s economic recovery has been important to the United States and the global economy, as it is an important center of demand and supply. At the same time, during this period of global economic downturn, the United States and other countries are now potentially vulnerable to a concerted PRC export push that has been expanding since summer 2020 and any effort China makes to take additional market share in strategic sectors.
Congressional Research Service 40
Steel Overcapacity
Chinese overcapacity in steel has been highly contentious for its global impacts, and China could potentially see exports as a quick way to reduce inventories and secure needed cash. Similar to what happened during the global financial crisis in 2008-09, China is poised to take additional global market share in 2020 because it did not dial back production during the COVID-19 outbreak. Chinese blast furnaces continued to run during the COVID-19 crisis, and China’s steel production for January-February 2020 was up 3% over the same period in 2019. Meanwhile, due to collapsing domestic demand and logistics constraints, China’s finished steel inventories rose by 45% in January-February 2020 over the same period in 2019.127 China’s steel production at the end of 2019 was already at an all-time high of almost 1 billion tons, with China producing over 50% of global supply, according to the World Steel Association and China’s State Statistical Bureau (Figure 8).128 China’s crude steel production recovered in July 2020, rising 9.1% year-on-year. China’s crude steel production during the January-September 2020 period is up 4.5% over the same period in 2019. In contrast, crude steel production over the same period is down 17.9% in the EU; down 18.2% in North America; down 16.5% in India; down 19.1% in Japan; and down 7.5% in South Korea.