Cloud computing provides the ability of computation services via the Internet. According to the NIST definition [156], traditional cloud computing has three service categories: “Infrastructure as a Service” (IaaS), “Platform as a Service” (PaaS), and “Software as a Service” (SaaS). Specifically, IaaS allows software developers to configure and use computation, storage, and network resources. For example, AWS provides the computation service like Elastic Compute Cloud (AWS EC2) [6] and the storage service like Simple Storage Service (AWS S3) [7]. However, IaaS does not hide the operation complexity of the application; thus, developers are still responsible for resource provisioning, runtime configuration, application code management, etc. SaaS allows software developers to directly use the cloud provider’s applications, such as Gmail [30] and Docs [29] provided by Google. SaaS completely hides the underlying operation complexity, but use cases are limited. Moreover, developers completely lose control of the application. PaaS allows software developers to develop, run, and manage applications using the execution environment supported by the cloud provider. For example, Google provides the App Engine [27], while Azure offers App Service [16]. PaaS compromises the operation complexity between IaaS and SaaS, but software developers still are responsible for and manage some underlying tasks. To ease the cloud management burden on software developers, cloud providers presented a new paradigm, i.e., serverless computing. Serverless computing is similar to PaaS; differently, it almost hides all complex underlying management tasks for developers, i.e., “server-less”, and it also allows developers to control their applications. Serverless computing-related applications (a.k.a., serverless applications) follow the microservice software style, which decomposes the application into a subset of independent tasks. However, the differences between serverless applications and microservice-based applications are as follows. First, the serverless application’s unit (a.k.a., serverless function) is a smaller granularity than the unit of the microservice-based application. Second, microservice-based applications still make developers face the additional effort of underlying tasks like scalability, fault tolerance, and load balancing. Third, serverless functions adopt the event-driven pattern while microservices are usually responsive to their interfaces. In addition, serverless computing is more suitable for short-lived and bursty applications because its platforms provide high and automatic scalability, while microservices are suited for long-running and stable applications. 
Serverless computing is an emerging and potential cloud computing paradigm, and its significant advantage is to free software developers from the burden of complex and error-prone server management tasks. Serverless computing provides “Backend as a Service” (BaaS) and “Function as a Service” (FaaS) [120], as shown in Fig. 2. Specifically, BaaS represents tailor-made cloud services provided by cloud providers, e.g., cloud storage and notification services. These services can service FaaS optionally to simplify the backend functionality development for software developers. FaaS represents that software developers can write stateless, event-driven serverless functions, making them focus on the logic of serverless applications. Generally, FaaS is the core of serverless computing, allowing developers to develop and control their applications.
To better understand serverless computing, we introduce its key characteristics as follows. • Functionality and no operations (NoOps): In serverless platforms, software developers can select their most appropriate and familiar languages (e.g., Python, JavaScript, and Java) to write the function-level code snippet to create serverless applications. Moreover, serverless platforms provide user-friendly integrated development environments (IDEs). For the deployment of serverless applications, software developers only need to upload their application code to the serverless platform without complex environment configuration. In addition, BaaS is the equivalent of off-the-shelf backend functionality. Its related services can be directly applied in the application by developers to replace similar backend functionalities. Therefore, developers do not have to redevelop these functionalities and deal with server configurations.
Auto-scaling: Serverless platforms can automatically scale function instances horizontally and vertically according to the application workload dynamics. Horizontal scaling is to launch (i.e., scale-in) new function instances or recycle (i.e., scale-out) running ones, while vertical scaling is to add (i.e., scale-up) or remove (i.e., scale-down) the amount of computation and other resources from running function instances. After completing requests, the corresponding function instances and allocated resources will retain in memory for a short time to prepare to be reused by subsequent requests of the same function. If there are no subsequent requests, these instances and resources will be automatically recycled by the serverless platform, i.e., scaling to zero. However, scaling to zero makes incoming new requests face the cold start problem, which takes a long time to prepare required runtime environments from scratch. 
• Utilization-based billing: In serverless computing, software developers charge for the actually allocated or consumed resources of the serverless application in the fine-granular execution unit. For example, AWS Lambda’s pricing is related to the allocated memory, and Azure Functions considers the consumed memory. On the other hand, serverless functions are event-driven; thus, they will not run without being triggered, and developers do not pay any cost. This feature eliminates the concern of paying for idle resources. In summary, the billing pattern of serverless computing is relatively reasonable and inexpensive compared with traditional cloud computing, which requires always renting and paying resources in memory on standby. 
Separation of computation and storage: Serverless computing adopts the separation way of computation and storage, i.e., separately scaling and independently provisioning and pricing. Generally, computation refers to stateless serverless functions, while storage represents cloud storage services provided by cloud providers to store data from the serverless function. This separation way can ensure the auto-scaling ability of the serverless platform for bursty workloads. •
Additional limitations: Cloud providers set some additional limitations for serverless functions to keep the vital auto-scaling feature of serverless platforms. Generally, these limitations contain function execution timeout, deployment package size, local disk size, memory allocation maximum, etc. Moreover, different serverless platforms have different demands regarding these additional limitations. The above key characteristics show the unique advantages of serverless computing. In addition, some features and limitations will also essentially influence the development of cloud-based applications.
