SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE
Replacement Parts
• Water Filtration - Replacement water filtration disks can be purchased through
your local retailer.
• Decanters – You can usually purchase a replacement decanter from the store where
you purchased your coffeemaker. If you are unable to find a replacement, please call
1-800-667-8623 in Canada for information on where you can find a store that carries
replacement decanters.
Repairs
If your coffeemaker requires service, do not return it to the store where you purchased
it. All repairs and replacements must be made by Sunbeam or an authorized Sunbeam
Service Center. Please call us at the following toll-free telephone number to find the
location of the nearest authorized service center:
Canada 1-800-667-8623
You may also visit our website at www.sunbeam.ca for a list of service centers.
To assist us in serving you, please have the coffeemaker model number and date
of purchase available when you call. The model number is stamped on the bottom
metal plate of the coffeemaker.
We welcome your questions, comments or suggestions.
In all your communications, please include your complete name, address and
telephone number and a description of the problem.
Visit our website at www.sunbeam.ca and discover the secret to brewing the
perfect cup of coffee. You will also find a rich blend of gourmet recipes, entertaining
tips and the latest information on SUNBEAM TM products.
WARRANTY INFORMATION
1-YEAR LIMITED WARRANTY
Sunbeam Products, Inc. doing business as Jarden Consumer Solutions or if in Canada, Sunbeam
Corporation (Canada) Limited doing business as Jarden Consumer Solutions (collectively “JCS”)
warrants that for a period of one year from the date of purchase, this product will be free from
defects in material and workmanship. JCS, at its option, will repair or replace this product or any
component of the product found to be defective during the warranty period. Replacement will
be made with a new or remanufactured product or component. If the product is no longer
available, replacement may be made with a similar product of equal or greater value. This is your
exclusive warranty. Do NOT attempt to repair or adjust any electrical or mechanical functions on
this product. Doing so will void this warranty.
This warranty is valid for the original retail purchaser from the date of initial retail purchase and is
not transferable. Keep the original sales receipt. Proof of purchase is required to obtain warranty
performance. JCS dealers, service centers, or retail stores selling JCS products do not have the
right to alter, modify or any way change the terms and conditions of this warranty.
This warranty does not cover normal wear of parts or damage resulting from any of the following:
negligent use or misuse of the product, use on improper voltage or current, use contrary to the
operating instructions, disassembly, repair or alteration by anyone other than JCS or an authorized
JCS service center. Further, the warranty does not cover: Acts of God, such as fire, flood,
hurricanes and tornadoes.
What are the limits on JCS’s Liability?
JCS shall not be liable for any incidental or consequential damages caused by the breach of
any express, implied or statutory warranty or condition.
Except to the extent prohibited by applicable law, any implied warranty or condition of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose is limited in duration to the duration of the
above warranty.
JCS disclaims all other warranties, conditions or representations, express, implied, statutory or
otherwise.
JCS shall not be liable for any damages of any kind resulting from the purchase, use or misuse of,
or inability to use the product including incidental, special, consequential or similar damages or
loss of profits, or for any breach of contract, fundamental or otherwise, or for any claim brought
against purchaser by any other party.
Some provinces, states or jurisdictions do not allow the exclusion or limitation of incidental or
consequential damages or limitations on how long an implied warranty lasts, so the above
limitations or exclusion may not apply to you.
This warranty gives you specific legal rights, and you may also have other rights that vary from
province to province, state to state or jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
How to Obtain Warranty Service
In the U.S.A.
If you have any question regarding this warranty or would like to obtain warranty service,
please call 1-800-458-8407 and a convenient service center address will be provided to you.
In Canada
If you have any question regarding this warranty or would like to obtain warranty service,
please call 1-800-667-8623 and a convenient service center address will be provided to you.
In the U.S.A., this warranty is offered by Sunbeam Products, Inc. doing business as Jarden
Consumer Solutions located in Boca Raton, Florida 33431. In Canada, this warranty is offered by
Sunbeam Corporation (Canada) Limited doing business as Jarden Consumer Solutions, located
at 20 B Hereford Street, Brampton, Ontario L6Y 0M1. If you have any other problem or claim in
connection with this product, please write our Consumer Service Department.
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN THIS PRODUCT TO ANY OF THESE ADDRESSES
OR TO THE PLACE OF PURCHASE.