Rules
 The current NIL rules related to college athletes apply via state law and/or NCAA rules. Due to the potential of having a patchwork of so many NIL rules, the NCAA is now asking for federal legislation addressing this patchwork of NIL rules. The NCAA allows member institutions to recruit and sign high school athletes who have participated in NIL activities while the student was in high school.
 

 The current NIL rules related to high school athletes are established state to state. There is a possibility of 51 different sets of rules relating to NIL (50 states and the District of Columbia), and 51 different sets of rules relating to transfer (undue influence, bona fide moves, traditional academic transfer rules, and subsequent eligibility determinations) leads to many questions.
 

 As of October 4, 2023, the following 30 states and the District of Columbia allow interscholastic athletes to receive NIL payments: Alaska, California, Colorado, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia and Washington. This developing area requires measured and contemplative rule-making. What the landscape in both the near- and far-future will look like for both collegiate and high school NIL is anyone’s guess. But one thing is for sure, NIL at both the collegiate and interscholastic levels is here to stay.
 

 New and Different Options
 The financial opportunities for high school athletes are not just for product endorsement, gear sales or the more traditional NIL models – interscholastic opportunities can be much more sophisticated. Now, there must be consideration of rules that apply to 1) the developing individual athlete “brands” which the individual athlete has personally created on social media, and 2) the number of new and developing avenues of revenue streams for these athletes that don’t necessarily include U.S. currency.
 

 An example of such an option for high school athletes is what former USC quarterback and Heisman Trophy winner Matt Leinart and current USC quarterback and Heisman Trophy winner Caleb Williams provide with their Hall of Goats organization. Hall of Goats has a platform designed to provide athletes the opportunity to drop exclusive NFT collections and take advantage of their NIL rights, while providing personal brand, content and digital resources.
 

 NFT collections are “non-functional tokens.” These tokens and the platform are designed to allow athletes to use the platform to help build their brands, tell their stories and set them up for long-term success. As a result, the traditional notions of what constitutes remunerative value for a high school athlete no longer is only about “cash” but is about other things of value that if properly “negotiated” can lead to additional, and non-traditional monetizing of the athlete, at a time the athlete chooses.
 

 The significance of athletes having their own brand is that it allows them access to NIL separate from their high school team and school district. The most common limitations on high school NIL are that the athlete cannot use the school’s name, uniform, mascot, etc., as part of what they market for NIL. At the high school level, the brand’s value is not linked to the school the athlete attends but is linked to the individual.
 

 The “athlete brand” can be quantified by the number of social media followers the athlete has, and the number of views on videos that the athlete has. This is where the value to the athlete is, which is different from the collegiate model where an athlete may get a percentage of profits from the sale of their school jersey with the number and name they wear, cashing in on the school’s brand and name.