The Antitrust Reform Movement and UMC Rulemaking
The past several years have witnessed renewed interest in antitrust law and policy. Much of this interest
has been driven by concerns that the antitrust laws have been underenforced and that current doctrine is
overly permissive. Since the 1970s, the Supreme Court has reduced the number of per se rules that define
specific conduct as anticompetitive without inquiries into market dynamics and harms in particular cases.
In doing so, the Court has expanded the scope of the “rule of reason”—a standard that, in its current form,
typically involves a burden-shifting framework that requires such inquiries.
Empirical studies have found that the vast majority—as much as 97%—of complaints evaluated under the
rule of reason are dismissed at the first stage of this burden-shifting process, leading some commentators
to argue that the rule of reason is, in practice, a rule of per se legality. Others have criticized the costs and
slow pace of antitrust litigation, which they attribute in part to the detailed analysis required by current
law. Alongside the extension of the rule of reason, the Supreme Court has relaxed several aspects of
monopolization doctrine, limiting the ways in which antitrust law restricts the unilateral conduct of
dominant firms.
Congressional Research Service 3
Advocates of more aggressive antitrust enforcement have supported UMC rulemaking as a means of
counteracting these developments. In 2020, Lina Khan (who now serves as FTC Chair) and Rohit Chopra
(an FTC Commissioner at the time) co-authored an article in which they contended that exclusive reliance
on case-by-case adjudication under the rule of reason had produced “a system of enforcement that
generates ambiguity, unduly drains resources from enforcers, and deprives individuals and firms of any
real opportunity to democratically participate in the process.” They thus argued that the FTC should
supplement antitrust adjudication with UMC rules, which could promote legal clarity, lower enforcement
costs, and allow the public to participate in the formulation of competition policy. Other academic work
from proponents of antitrust reform has likewise urged enforcers and courts to “eschew the open-ended
rule of reason” in favor of simpler presumptions and bright-line rules.
In July 2021, President Biden joined these calls for UMC rulemaking. In an executive order on
competition policy, President Biden encouraged the FTC to exercise its “statutory rulemaking authority
under the Federal Trade Commission Act to curtail the unfair use of non-compete clauses and other
clauses or agreements that may unfairly limit worker mobility.”
Others have identified additional issues that the FTC may seek to address if its UMC rulemaking power is
upheld. A coalition of advocacy groups has filed a petition for rulemaking urging the FTC to prohibit
exclusive dealing by dominant firms. Commentators have also suggested that the FTC may propose rules
targeting reverse-payment settlements in the pharmaceutical industry (often called “pay-for-delay”
agreements), predatory pricing, and manufacturer repair restrictions.
The FTC’s authority to issue such rules—and the Non-Compete Rule—depends not only on whether
Section 6(g) authorizes legislative rulemaking, but also on the scope of Section 5’s prohibition of UMC.
The Supreme Court has repeatedly said that Section 5 is broader than the Sherman Act and the
Clayton Act (the other core federal antitrust laws). However, the scope of this additional coverage—often
called the FTC’s “standalone” Section 5 authority—is unsettled.
Under previous leadership, the FTC took a narrow view of its standalone Section 5 authority. In a 2015
policy statement, the FTC indicated that decisions to bring standalone Section 5 actions would be guided
by considerations of consumer welfare; that the FTC would evaluate challenged conduct under “a
framework similar to the rule of reason”; and that the FTC was less likely to bring a standalone Section 5
action if enforcement of the Sherman Act or Clayton Act was sufficient to address the relevant
competitive harm.
The FTC rescinded this policy statement in 2021 and issued a new Section 5 policy statement the
following year. In the 2022 policy statement, the FTC identified two criteria it will consider in evaluating
whether a “method of competition” is “unfair.” First, the FTC indicated that “unfair” conduct “may be
coercive, exploitative, collusive, abusive, deceptive, predatory, or involve the use of economic power of a
similar nature,” and “may also be otherwise restrictive or exclusionary.” Second, the FTC explained that
such conduct “must tend to negatively affect competitive conditions”—for example, by foreclosing or
impairing the opportunities of market participants, reducing competition between rivals, limiting choice,
or otherwise harming consumers. The 2022 policy statement indicated that this second inquiry will not
turn on whether conduct directly causes harm in particular cases, but instead will focus on whether
conduct “has a tendency to generate negative consequences.”
The FTC framed its 2022 policy statement as a return to the original purposes of the FTC Act. Former
Commissioner Christine Wilson dissented from the statement, arguing that it departed from antitrust’s
traditional focus on consumer welfare and did not provide clear guidance to businesses on how to
structure their conduct to avoid violating the law.