Law Enforcement Identification When Executing a Warrant
Overview
As noted above, amid recent calls for legislative changes to police practices, another area that has received attention concerns the authority for law enforcement officers to execute a warrant by entering a home without first seeking consensual entry by announcing themselves and their purpose. As a default, law enforcement officers must comply with the knock and announce rule— an “ancient” common-law doctrine, which generally requires officers to knock and announce their presence before entering a home to execute a search warrant. The Supreme Court has interpreted the Fourth Amendment’s reasonableness requirement as generally mandating compliance with the knock and announce rule. The knock and announce rule is also codified in a federal statute, but the Supreme Court has interpreted that statute as “prohibiting nothing” and “merely [authorizing] officers to damage property [upon entry] in certain instances.” When officers violate the knock and announce rule, they may be subject to civil lawsuits and “internal police discipline.” However, in Hudson v. Michigan the Supreme Court curtailed the remedies available for knock and announce violations by concluding that evidence obtained following such a violation is not subject to the exclusionary rule, which “prevents the government from using most evidence gathered in violation of the United States Constitution.”
There are two closely related exceptions to the knock and announce rule, the first of which is for exigent circumstances. Exigent circumstances are those where the “police have a ‘reasonable suspicion’ that knocking and announcing would be dangerous, futile, or destructive to the purposes of the investigation.” Typical examples include instances where police believe that the suspect is armed or likely to destroy evidence. Exigent circumstances must be based on the “particular circumstances” of each case, and may not amount to a “blanket exception to the [knock and announce] requirement” for “entire categor[ies] of criminal activity.” For example, the Supreme Court rejected an assertion that “police officers are never required to knock and announce their presence when executing a search warrant in a felony drug investigation.” Instead, “in each case, it is the duty of a court confronted with the question to determine whether the facts and circumstances of the particular entry justified dispensing with the knock-and-announce requirement.”
The second exception is for no-knock warrants, which provide explicit authority for judges to grant so-called “no-knock” entry in the warrant itself, upon a finding of certain factual predicates. The justifications for no-knock warrants are similar to, and sometimes described interchangeably with, the concept of exigent circumstances. No-knock warrants, and exigent circumstances, both typically involve instances where there is a risk that knocking and announcing would endanger officers or result in the destruction of evidence. A key distinction between no-knock warrants and no-knock entry pursuant to the exigent circumstances exception is temporal. With no-knock warrants, officers “have anticipated exigent circumstances before searching, and have asked for pre-search judicial approval to enter without knocking.” In contrast, when officers lack a no-knock warrant and enter without knocking due to exigent circumstances the justification for bypassing knock and announce requirements may arise as late as when the officers are at the door. A number of states have statutes that authorize magistrate judges to grant no-knock warrants in certain circumstances. Although a federal statute previously authorized no-knock warrants for certain drug searches, Congress repealed it. As a result, the legal status of federal no-knock search warrants is unsettled, although federal officers do sometimes employ no-knock warrants or act pursuant to no-knock warrants issued by state courts when serving on joint state-federal task forces.
From a Fourth Amendment standpoint, the Supreme Court has indicated some approval of “[t]he practice of allowing magistrates to issue no-knock warrants . . . when sufficient cause to do so can be demonstrated ahead of time,” assuming that the practice does not amount to a blanket exception to knock and announce. However, one unresolved question is whether federal courts have authority to issue no-
Congressional Research Service 4
knock warrants in the absence of a statute expressly providing that power, as federal courts “possess only that power authorized by Constitution and statute . . . .” The DOJ has concluded that federal courts are authorized to do so, in large part because the federal rule governing search warrants has been broadly interpreted by courts in other contexts to include specific searches that it does not expressly authorize.
In one sense, the legal vitality of federal no-knock warrants may be of limited practical significance; as noted, federal law enforcement officers may still be permitted to enter a home without knocking and announcing if exigent circumstances are present. However, some courts have concluded that no-knock warrants shield officers from responsibility for independently assessing the existence of exigent circumstances at the time of entry. To the extent that is true, no-knock warrants could permit no-knock entry where the exigent circumstances exception would not—for example, in an instance where the factors that justified the no-knock warrant are no longer present at the time of entry. Relatedly, if a valid no-knock warrant provides such a shield against the responsibility of reassessing exigent circumstances at the time of entry, it could limit the availability of civil lawsuits as a remedy where officers disregard knock and announce requirements pursuant to a no-knock warrant, but exigent circumstances no longer exist at the time of entry.