WEB PAGES
Web pages are what make up the World Wide Web. These documents are written in
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) and are translated by your Web browser. Web pages can
either be static or dynamic. Static pages show the same content each time they are viewed.
Dynamic pages have content that can change each time they are accessed. These pages are
typically written in scripting languages such as PHP, Perl, ASP, or JSP. The scripts in the pages
run functions on the server that return things like the date and time, and database information.
All the information is returned as HTML code, so when the page gets to your browser, all the
browser has to do is translate the HTML.
Electronic (digital) document created with HTML and, therefore, accessible with a
browser. In addition to text and graphics, web pages may also contain downloadable data files,
audio and video files, and hyperlinks to other pages or sites. A website is usually a collection of
web pages. A web page is a document that's created in html that shows up on the internet when
you type in or go to the web page's address.
Web Page
A web page is a document commonly written in HyperText Markup Language (HTML)
that is accessible through the Internet or other network using a browser. A web page is accessed
by entering a URL address and may contain text, graphics, and hyperlinks to other web pages
and files.
Web pages are created using HTML which stands for HyperText Markup Language. All
web pages, whether big or small, have to be developed in HTML to be displayed in web
browsers. HTML, contrary to its name, is not a language. Rather, it consists of tags that specify
the purpose of what they enclose. For instance, by surrounding a block of text on a web page
with the <p> tag (the paragraph tag) tells the browser that all that text is to be placed as
paragraph or using the <em> around a phrase will give emphasis to it.
7
Types of Web Pages
Advocacy Web pages established for political candidates, called “e-campaigning,” has
become an important part of politics. Surveys show that more than 50 percent of Internet users
turn to the Web for information about political topics.
Business/marketing Web pages used for shopping on the Internet are increasingly
popular. In 1999, 17 million households shopped online. This figure is expected to grow to 49
million by 2004. A survey of back-to-school shoppers 34 years old and younger showed that 17
percent planned to shop online for their children’s school needs. Perhaps more significant, only 6
percent of surveyed shoppers reported being uncomfortable with buying on the Internet.
Educational institutions frequently publish informational Web pages. Today, most colleges have
web sites that offer course descriptions, information about the student population, and
registration costs and deadlines. When shopping for college, surveys show that high school
seniors use the Web more than catalogs or guidebooks; about 80 percent of college-bound
students start looking at college Web sites as sophomores.
News Web pages are the most popular Web sites among Americans with access to the
Internet. Although these Web sites often are associated with newspapers, magazines, television
stations, or radio stations, some are published only online, without a related print or broadcast
media.
Portal Web pages often offer the following free services: search engine, news, sports and
weather, free personal Web pages, reference tools, shopping malls, e-mail, instant messaging,
newsgroups, and chat rooms. The dictionary defines a “portal” as a door or gateway. Portal Web
pages are gateways to a host of services.
INTERNET CHAT
On the Internet, chatting is talking to other people who are using the Internet at the same
time you are. Usually, this "talking" is the exchange of typed-in messages requiring one site as
the repository for the messages (or "chat site") and a group of users who take part from anywhere
on the Internet.
In some cases, a private chat can be arranged between two parties who meet initially in a
group chat. Chats can be ongoing or scheduled for a particular time and duration. Most chats are
focused on a particular topic of interest and some involve guest experts or famous people who
"talk" to anyone joining the chat.