Innate Immunity
 Innate Detection and Immune Evasion
 The lungs maintain many defense mechanisms to survey and eliminate airborne threats. Lung epithelial cells (LECs) secrete anti-microbial peptides, complement proteins, and defensins which enhance granulocyte activity and create a less hospitable environment for Coccidioides (Hernández-Santos et al., 2018). To survive, Coccidioides must successfully avoid detection from surveying and patrolling innate immune cells. Lung-resident macrophages, also known as alveolar macrophages, comprise up to 95% of pulmonary leukocytes and participate in early immune detection of pathogens and maintain the lung microenvironment (Wynn and Vannella, 2016). In Aspergillus infections, tissue-specific neutrophils are recruited by LECs and enter the lung early after infection due to β-glucan and chitin (Dubey et al., 2014). Innate leukocytes control early pathogen invasion via phagocytosis and production of reactive oxide and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) (Xu and Shinohara, 2017). β-glucan and chitin are conserved across many fungal species, including Coccidioides, so these molecules could interact with epithelial cells and aid in neutrophil recruitment. In cases where host immune responses cannot control infection, disease becomes chronic. Host responses sometimes control infections through granuloma formation in the lung as fungi is walled off instead of destroyed (Nguyen et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2014; Wynn and Vannella, 2016).
 

 To survive lung defenses and evade innate immune responses, Coccidioides expresses virulence factors for immune evasion and survival. Inside the lung, arthroconidia express ornithine decarboxylase, an enzyme implicated during growth from arthroconidia to spherule state (Guevara-Olvera et al., 2000). During transition, the spherule internal cell wall segments bud off into endospores. Lifecycle transition allows vulnerable, easily phagocytosed, arthroconidia to develop into phagocytosis-resistant spherules (Hung et al., 2002; Gonzalez et al., 2011; Nguyen et al., 2013). Arthroconidia are vulnerable to RNS while mature spherules suppress nitric oxide species (NOS) and inducible NOS expression in macrophages (Figure 1) (Gonzalez et al., 2011). Mature spherules are too large for most host phagocytic activity, allowing Coccidiodes to evade early immune detection (Hung et al., 2002). Coccidioides induces host expression of arginase resulting in ornithine and urea production, important components for transition from arthroconidia to spherule (Hung et al., 2007).
 

 FGURE 1
 www.frontiersin.org
 Figure 1 Fungal dimorphism presents challenges for immune detection and activation. Early infection: Coccidioides is vulnerable to immune detection during early infection due to the smaller size (2–5 μM) and SOWgp expression which is detected via Dectin-1 and TLR2 on innate immune cells. These interactions mediate clearance via phagocytosis and reactive oxide species production. Later infection: As Coccidioides sporulates, it secretes MEP1 which digests SOWgp from the fungal surface, hampering immune detection. Spherules induce arginase expression in host tissues, suppressing NOS/NO production via an unknown mechanism, contributing to immune suppression.
 

 In the spherule state, Coccidioides secretes metalloproteinase 1 (Mep1) which digests an immunodominant antigen spherical outer wall glycoprotein (SOWgp) on the fungal surface (Figure 1) (Hung et al., 2005). Phagocytotic granulocytes rely on pathogen associated molecular patterns such as SOWgp, thus Mep1 secretion prevents detection by innate immune cells (Hung et al., 2005). Coccidioides upregulates nitrate reductase during development, an enzyme that converts nitrate to nitrite, thereby enhancing Coccidioides survival in anoxic conditions, such as those found inside a granuloma (Johannesson et al., 2006). Early detection to inhaled fungus is critical for host response. Macrophages and neutrophils detect Coccidioides arthroconidia and immature spherules via receptors Dectin-1, Dectin-2, and Mincle interacting with SOWgp (Hung et al., 2002; Nguyen et al., 2013). Endothelial lung cells use these same receptors to regulate defensin secretion.
 

 Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and c-type lectin receptors (CLRs) interact with major pathogen-associated molecular patterns to detect Coccidioides (Romani, 2004; Viriyakosol et al., 2008; Viriyakosol et al., 2013). Like most fungi, Coccidioides expresses β-glucans, chitins, and mannans in the outer cell wall (Nguyen et al., 2013). These cell components are recognized by a variety of TLRs and CLRs and elicit strong inflammatory responses from local immune cells. Coccidioides interactions with TLR2 and Dectin-1 on macrophages activate production of reactive oxide species (ROS) and inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα) (Viriyakosol et al., 2008; Viriyakosol et al., 2013). There are no known nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like (NOD-like) receptors yet associated with Coccidioides detection.
 

 In humans, polymorphisms in IFNγ/IL-12 signaling pathway result in a STAT1 gain of function mutations that associate with increased disease severity in Coccidioides, Histoplasma, and Candida infection (Sampaio et al., 2013). In disseminated Coccidioides, patients with severe disease were found to have a STAT3 mutation (Odio et al., 2015). STAT 3 mediates IL-23 signaling, critical for IFNγ, IL-12, and IL-17 production while STAT1 signaling induces Th1 cell differentiation in response to IL-12 to produce IFNγ; IFNγ, in turn, inhibits Th17 differentiation (Yeh et al., 2014). IL-12β1 receptor deficiency is associated with increased risk of disseminated coccidioidomycosis (Yeh et al., 2014). In chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, gain of function mutations in STAT1 and STAT3 correlates to more severe disease and poor TH17 responses (Zheng et al., 2015). These observations suggest that STAT1 and STAT3 immune signaling is critical in host control of Th1/Th17 cytokine balance and is required for protection and Coccidioides fungal control.
 

 In Blastomyces dermatitidis infection, LECs regulate collaborative killing between alveolar macrophages, dendritic cells (DC), and neutrophils (Hussell and Bell, 2014; Hernández-Santos et al., 2018). Upon LECs ablation, B. dermatitidis phagocytosis is reduced, and viable yeast numbers increase. Other data suggests that IL-1/IL-1R interactions regulate CCL20 expression in LECs. Chemokine CCL20 strongly recruits lymphocytes and weakly recruits neutrophils (Hernández-Santos et al., 2018). IL-1R-deficient mice express less CCL20 and lung Th17 cells are reduced, suggesting that IL-1/IL-1R signaling in LECs could regulate adaptive immune functions (Hernández-Santos et al., 2018). IL-1R is critical for vaccine induced resistance to Coccidioides infection via MyD88 induction of Th17 responses (Hung et al., 2014a; Hung et al., 2016a). Though it has not been explored, LECs could mediate early responses to Coccidioides through IL-1R, suggesting another innate immune cell role in anti-fungal responses within the lung tissues.
 

 Alveoli structure likely helps shape local immune responses. Three dominant cell types exist within and around the alveoli structure: Type 1 and Type 2 pneumocytes (also known as alveolar epithelial cells, AECs), and tissue-resident alveolar macrophages (Guillot et al., 2013; Hussell and Bell, 2014). Type 1 pneumocytes (AECI) secrete IL-10 constitutively, which bind to IL-10R on alveolar macrophages to maintain an anti-inflammatory state. Type 2 pneumocytes (or AECII) express CD200 which interacts with CD200R on alveolar macrophage to inhibit pro-inflammatory phenotype (Guillot et al., 2013; Hernández-Santos et al., 2018). Alveolar macrophages express TGFβ-receptors that bind to pneumocyte-expressed αvβ6 integrin, tethering them in the alveolar airspace. In inflammatory conditions, AECIs upregulate TLRs and AECIIs increase SP-A and SP-D production (Guillot et al., 2013). These surfactant proteins are known to enhance pathogen opsonization and phagocytosis, and are capable of binding to Coccidioides antigen (Awasthi et al., 2004). Coccidioides infected mice expressed less SP-A and SP-D protein in their bronchial lavage fluid compared to uninfected and vaccinated controls, demonstrating the pathogen’s capability of altering the lung mucosa (Awasthi et al., 2004). AECII secreted production of surfactant proteins may be influenced by Coccidioides allowing fungal escape of phagocytosis and prolonged survival.