Methadone
 Methadone is a slow-acting opioid agonist indicated in the treatment of OUD and opioid withdrawal management. Although methadone is only available through approved opioid treatment programs, federal and state laws allow take-home doses for select patients who have demonstrated treatment progress [14, 15].
 

 Methadone treatment aims to suppress opioid withdrawal, block the effects of illicit opioids, reduce opioid craving, and facilitate patient engagement in psychosocial and nonpharmacological interventions. Methadone treatment has shown superiority over abstinence-based approaches [16]. While methadone is a frequently utilized medication in MAT, both patients and providers should be aware of the potential risks associated with treatment. Methadone treatment increases the risk of arrhythmias including QT interval prolongation and torsades des pointes [17, 18]. Obtaining a history of structural heart disease, arrhythmia, syncope, and other risk factors for QT interval prolongation is critical before starting treatment. Methadone also presents with numerous drug-drug interactions due to cytochrome P450 isoenzymes involved in its metabolism. MAT providers should closely monitor for interactions that could potentiate or synergize methadone’s effects on a patient. Methadone is safe for use in pregnant patients [14, 15].
 

 Practice guidelines published by the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) Methadone Action Group [14, 15] recommend an initial dose range from 10 mg to 30 mg, reassessing every 2–4 h when peak levels are reached. Following an initiation period, methadone dosing is based on the goals of treatment and patient dependence. Less than 30 mg per day can lessen acute withdrawal but is not as effective in suppressing cravings. Most patients fare better if their initial 30 mg to 40 mg per-day dose is gradually increased to a 60 mg to 120 mg per day maintenance dose. Randomized trials have shown that patients demonstrate better retention in treatment with higher doses of 80–100 mg per day [19, 20]. A dose-response effect is observed for methadone treatment retention rates [21, 22]. Doses above 120 mg per day are utilized with select patients due to the increased purity of heroin and the strength of prescription opioids resulting in increased difficulty to block opioid effects. The optimal length of treatment is not well established; however, relapse rates are highest for patients who drop out [14, 15].
 

 Naltrexone
 Naltrexone is a long-acting, full opioid antagonist. Like buprenorphine, naltrexone can be prescribed in the outpatient setting for OUD. Unlike buprenorphine, naltrexone can also be prescribed outpatient for alcohol use disorder treatment [14, 15]. Both formulations, oral and extended-release (ER) injectable, have demonstrated treatment efficacy; however, oral naltrexone is not recommended except under limited circumstances because retention in depot naltrexone is better than usually observed in studies utilizing oral naltrexone [23]. Trials are often limited due to high dropout rates and poor adherence [14, 15]. Adding an agent that improves dopaminergic function to complement naltrexone is a novel approach being studied to encourage adherence [24].
 

 Treatment goals include prevention of relapse, inhibition of illicit opioid effects, opioid craving reduction, and the facilitation of patient engagement in psychosocial and nonpharmacological interventions [14, 15]. Oral naltrexone is best for those who can be closely supervised and are highly motivated because it has high rates of nonadherence and a high risk for overdose upon relapse [23]. ER injectable naltrexone is most effective for patients who have failed other MAT options or are unable to obtain agonist treatment. Both formulations are generally well tolerated; however, patients should be cautioned regarding the high-risk opioid overdose with subsequent relapse due to diminished tolerance and heightened sensitivity [14, 15].
 

 Before naltrexone administration, the patient must be adequately detoxified from opioids with no physical dependence. A naloxone challenge can be utilized when uncertain of detoxification, monitoring for signs and symptoms of withdrawal. Oral naltrexone can be dosed at 50 mg daily or three times weekly with two 100 mg doses followed by one 150 mg dose. ER injectable naltrexone can be given every 3–4 weeks by deep intramuscular injection in the gluteal muscle at a set dosage of 380 mg per injection [14, 15].
 

 Naltrexone ER is associated with side effects such as insomnia, clinically insignificant elevation of transaminases, hypertension, naso-pharyngitis, and influenza [25]. Although naltrexone does not reduce respiratory drive, relapse with high-dose opioids may result in accidental overdose death due to diminished opioid tolerance. Unlike methadone and buprenorphine, naltrexone ER is not recommended for use in pregnant or breastfeeding women [14, 15].
 

 Buprenorphine
 Buprenorphine is a partial opioid agonist utilized to treat OUD [26]. Buprenorphine has the ability to relieve a patient’s drug cravings while maintaining a higher safety profile than other MAT medications. Due to buprenorphine’s “ceiling effect,” increasing dosages will not cause equally increasing respiratory depression in patients [27]. As such, buprenorphine is less likely to cause fatal respiratory depression during overdose [28, 29]. Caution should be applied when combining buprenorphine with other sedative medications, potentially causing higher levels of sedation. Buprenorphine, like methadone, is safe for use in pregnant patients [14, 15]. It demonstrates less peak-dosing suppression of fetal heart rate and less severe neonatal abstinence syndrome than methadone [25].
 

 A critical distinction of buprenorphine therapy is its ability for outpatient prescription following the Drug Addiction Treatment Act (DATA) of 2000 [30]. Any physician can prescribe buprenorphine following completion of an online training course. This distinction can increase access to MAT in otherwise inaccessible patient populations. Following a closely monitored initiation phase, dosing is usually 2 mg to 4 mg to reduce the risk of precipitating withdrawal [14, 15]. If well tolerated, the dose can be increased fairly rapidly to a dose that provides stable effects for 24 h and is effective, with evidence suggesting that doses of 16 mg and greater may be more effective at suppressing illicit opioid use [23]. The FDA recommendation limits dosing to 24 mg per day because higher doses may increase diversion risk [14, 15]. Retention on buprenorphine across low (2 mg–6 mg per day), medium (7 mg–15 mg per day), and high (≥16 mg per day) doses is significantly superior to placebo [31]. However, only high-dose buprenorphine reduces opioid use significantly compared to placebo [32].
 

 Buprenorphine can also be administered with naloxone as a single-dose tablet or buccal film [14, 15]. The goal of combining naloxone, an opioid antagonist, with buprenorphine is to discourage buprenorphine abuse. If the buprenorphine/naloxone product is crushed for the purpose of injection, naloxone will antagonize the agonistic effects of buprenorphine [33]. The FDA recently approved several new buprenorphine formulations for the treatment of OUD, including an ER injection, but data regarding their effectiveness are limited [14, 15]. Some emergency departments are now initiating buprenorphine therapy to patients experiencing withdrawal symptoms [34]. This new strategy has demonstrated promising results toward improving rates of MAT initiation, and its expansion is likely to continue over time [34, 35].
 

 The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) recommends appropriate counseling and social support programs for patients receiving buprenorphine therapy [36] “Group-based” buprenorphine treatments have gained interest since their inception, providing both buprenorphine prescription and group counseling together in a destigmatized environment. This model also increases the number of patients that a single physician could treat, addressing areas with limited access to MAT providers [37]. Some studies have suggested possible benefits of this treatment model [38, 39], particularly in prolonging treatment retention. Despite these advantages, the available supporting research has been limited and varied [38]. A 2017 literature review [39] examined 10 studies, 4 of which utilized small-group models and 6 of which utilized group psychotherapy. The authors concluded that there was limited evidence to support group-based buprenorphine therapy but that much of the literature available was either weak or potentially biased. Based on the limited research available and isolated reports of success, this practice has some feasibility and expands buprenorphine access for patients.