Why is this medication prescribed?
 Amlodipine is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure in adults and children 6 years and older. It is also used to treat certain types of angina (chest pain) and coronary artery disease (narrowing of the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart). Amlodipine is in a class of medications called calcium channel blockers. It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so the heart does not have to pump as hard. It controls chest pain by increasing the supply of blood to the heart. If taken regularly, amlodipine controls chest pain, but it does not stop chest pain once it starts. Your doctor may prescribe a different medication to take when you have chest pain.
 

 High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
 

 How should this medicine be used?
 Amlodipine comes as a tablet, an oral solution (liquid), and a suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take amlodipine around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take amlodipine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
 

 Shake the suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
 

 Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of amlodipine and gradually increase your dose.
 

 Amlodipine helps to control high blood pressure, angina, and coronary artery disease, but does not cure these conditions. Continue to take amlodipine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking amlodipine without talking to your doctor.
 

 Other uses for this medicine
 This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
 

 What special precautions should I follow?
 Before taking amlodipine,
 tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to amlodipine, any other medications, or any ingredients in amlodipine tablets, oral solution, or suspension. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
 tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
 tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart failure or heart or liver disease.
 tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking amlodipine, call your doctor.
 What special dietary instructions should I follow?
 If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, follow these directions carefully.
 

 What should I do if I forget a dose?
 Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is less than 12 hours until your next scheduled dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
 

 What side effects can this medication cause?
 Amlodipine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
 swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
 nausea
 stomach pain
 dizziness or lightheadedness
 muscle stiffness or tremors
 Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
 more frequent or more severe chest pain
 rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
 If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).