In recent years, the Administration and Congress have been increasingly engaged in supporting 
artificial intelligence R&D and working to address policy concerns arising from AI development 
and use. Congressional activities focused on AI increased substantially in the 116th and 117th 
Congresses, including multiple committee hearings in the House and Senate, the introduction of 
numerous AI-focused bills, and the passage of AI provisions in legislation. Enacted legislation 
has included the National AI Initiative Act of 2020 within the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (P.L. 116-283); the AI in Government 
Act of 2020 within the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (P.L. 116-260); and provisions 
focused on AI activities at NSF, DOE, and NIST within P.L. 117-167, the CHIPS and Science 
Act. 
AI holds potential benefits and opportunities, such as through augmenting human decisionmaking 
and optimizing performance for complex tasks. It also presents challenges and pitfalls, such as 
through perpetuating or amplifying bias and failing in unexpected ways. The ready availability in 
2022 of software (i.e., ChatGPT) that can intelligently (1) respond to questions, and (2) draft 
prose documents may represent a sentinel event in popular use of AI. 
There are several broad concerns related to AI, spanning multiple sectors, that could be 
considered in the 118th Congress. These include 
Congressional Research Service   
45 
Science and Technology Issues for the 118th Congress 
• the impact of AI and AI-driven automation on the workforce, including potential 
job losses and the need for worker retraining; 
• the challenges of educating students in AI, from teaching foundational concepts 
at the K-12 level to supporting doctoral-level training to meet increasing demand 
for AI expertise; 
• the balance of federal and private sector funding for AI; 
• whether and how to increase access to public datasets to train AI systems for use 
in the public and private sectors; 
• the development of standards and testing protocols and algorithmic auditing 
capabilities for AI systems; 
• the need for and effectiveness of federal and international coordination efforts in 
AI, as well as concerns over international competition in AI R&D and 
deployment; and 
• the incorporation of ethics, privacy, security, transparency, and accountability 
considerations in AI systems, including such applications as facial recognition 
technologies. 
There are additional national security concerns about the potential use of AI technologies that 
Congress could address, such as the potential for “deep fakes” to influence elections and erode 
public trust, the balance of human and automated decisionmaking in military operations, and 
concerns about the dissemination of U.S.-developed AI technologies and federally funded AI 
research results to potential competitors or adversaries.