In April 2024, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued a rule prohibiting most employers from
entering into or enforcing non-compete agreements with workers, subject to exceptions for the sale of a
business and preexisting non-competes with senior executives. The rule (the Non-Compete Rule)
implicates unsettled issues regarding the FTC’s authority to issue substantive competition regulations.
Lawsuits challenging the rule followed. In one of those cases, a federal district court has declared the
Non-Compete Rule unlawful and barred the FTC from enforcing it nationwide. Shortly before that
decision, another court held that a separate challenge to the rule was likely to succeed and preliminarily
enjoined the rule’s enforcement against the named plaintiff in that case. A third court has taken a more
favorable view of the Non-Compete Rule, denying a motion for a preliminary injunction and concluding
that the plaintiff had not established a reasonable probability that the rule exceeds the FTC’s legal
authority.
This Legal Sidebar provides background on the Non-Compete Rule and associated legal issues, along
with an overview of the litigation challenging it.
Background
The Non-Compete Rule
The Non-Compete Rule makes it unlawful to enter into or enforce a non-compete clause with any worker
who is not a senior executive. The rule prohibits employers from entering into non-competes with senior
executives after the rule’s effective date, but allows employers to enforce preexisting non-competes with
senior executives. The rule defines the term “senior executive” to mean a worker who occupied a
“policy-making position” and received total compensation of at least $151,164 in the preceding year.
The rule’s prohibitions are subject to an exception for non-compete clauses entered into pursuant to a
bona fide sale of a business entity, a person’s ownership interest in a business entity, or all or substantially
all of a business entity’s operating assets.
Congressional Research Service
https://crsreports.congress.gov
LSB11228
Congressional Research Service 2
The rule defines the term “non-compete clause” to mean a term or condition of employment that
“prohibits,” “penalizes,” or “functions to prevent” a worker from seeking or accepting work with a
different person after the conclusion of the employment that includes the term or condition. The rule
explains that this definition encompasses “de facto” or “functional” non-competes—for example,
“forfeiture-for-competition” clauses that extinguish an employer’s obligation to pay promised
compensation or benefits if a worker accepts another job. The rule does not, however, categorically
prohibit non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) or non-solicitation agreements.
The Non-Compete Rule defines the term “worker” to include employees and independent contractors.
That term does not include franchisees in the context of a franchisor-franchisee relationship, but does
include employees of a franchisor or franchisee.
Employers that fall outside of the FTC’s jurisdiction under the FTC Act are not subject to the rule. These
employers include certain banks, savings and loan institutions, federal credit unions, common carriers, air
carriers, and “persons, partnerships, or corporations insofar as they are subject to the Packers and
Stockyards Act.” Corporations that are not “organized to carry on business for [their] own profit or that of
[their] members” are also excluded from the FTC Act’s coverage. The rule explains that simply claiming
non-profit status under the tax code is not sufficient to qualify for this exclusion. Instead, the FTC
evaluates the economic realities of an entity’s activities to determine whether the exclusion applies.
The Non-Compete Rule requires employers to provide “clear and conspicuous notice” to workers subject
to prohibited non-compete clauses that the clauses “will not be, and cannot legally be” enforced.
Legal Authority
The FTC relied on Sections 5 and 6(g) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act) in promulgating
the Non-Compete Rule. Section 5 prohibits “unfair methods of competition” (UMC) and empowers the
FTC to enforce that prohibition through adjudication. Section 6 is titled “Additional powers of
Commission.” It confers a range of authorities, most of which involve investigations and the publication
of reports. The provision also includes Section 6(g), which empowers the FTC to “from time to time
classify corporations and . . . to make rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out” the FTC Act.
Sections 5 and 6(g) were both part of the original FTC Act, which Congress enacted in 1914. Since the
statute’s enactment, Congress has adopted several laws granting the FTC rulemaking authority over
discrete subjects, including the Wool Products Labeling Act, the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act,
the Fur Products Labeling Act, the Flammable Fabrics Act, and the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act.
The FTC first asserted that Section 6(g) endows it with general substantive rulemaking power in 1962,
and the agency adopted a number of trade regulation rules in the years that followed. Some of those rules
defined certain conduct as both a UMC and an “unfair or deceptive act or practice” (UDAP)—a separate
category of conduct prohibited by Section 5. Other rules relied only on the FTC’s UDAP power. One rule
relied solely on the FTC’s competition authority, but was never enforced and has been repealed.
In the 1970s, a trade association challenged the FTC’s authority to issue substantive rules under
Section 6(g) in National Petroleum Refiners Association v. FTC. The trade association argued that
Section 6(g) authorized only procedural rules, emphasizing that the FTC had not asserted substantive
rulemaking authority under Section 6(g) until 1962 and that FTC officials had occasionally denied the
existence of such authority. The trade association also contended that Congress’s enactment of several
statutes granting the FTC specific rulemaking authorities implied that the FTC lacked general rulemaking
authority.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit rejected those arguments. In affirming the FTC’s power to
issue legislative rules under Section 6(g), the court relied on appellate decisions construing similar
statutes as authorizing substantive rulemaking, the advantages of rulemaking in effectuating the FTC
Congressional Research Service 3
Act’s purposes, and the absence of any limiting language in the statutory text. The D.C. Circuit
downplayed the fact that the FTC had not claimed general rulemaking authority until 1962, reasoning that
the agency’s earlier interpretation of its legal authority did not warrant judicial deference. The court also
concluded that Congress may have provided the FTC with more specific rulemaking authorities based on
“uncertainty, understandable caution, and a desire to avoid litigation,” rather than a firm conviction that
the FTC lacked general rulemaking authority.
Two years after the National Petroleum Refiners decision, Congress enacted the Magnuson-Moss Act,
which imposed special procedural requirements for the FTC’s UDAP rules and eliminated the FTC’s
authority to issue such rules under Section 6(g). Magnuson-Moss did not by its terms affect the FTC’s
authority to issue UMC rules: the statute included a provision disclaiming an intent to affect “any
authority of the Commission to prescribe rules (including interpretive rules), and general statements of
policy, with respect to unfair methods of competition.”
Despite this language in Magnuson-Moss, the FTC’s putative authority to issue UMC rules has been
dormant since the enactment of that statute. The Non-Compete Rule marks the first rule promulgated
under Section 6(g) since the 1970s and the second rule ever that relies solely upon the FTC’s competition
authority.