-Hybrid Electric Vehicles
HEVs are powered by an internal combus-
tion engine or other propulsion source that
runs on conventional or alternative fuel
and an electric motor that uses energy
stored in a battery. The extra power
provided by the electric motor allows for
a smaller engine, resulting in better fuel
economy without sacrificing performance.
HEVs combine the benefits of high fuel
economy and low emissions with the
power and range of conventional vehicles.
HEVs do not require a plug to charge
the battery; instead, they charge using
regenerative braking and the internal
combustion engine. They capture energy
normally lost during braking by using
the electric motor as a generator, storing
the captured energy in the battery. The
energy from the battery provides extra
power during acceleration and auxiliary
power when idling.
-Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles
PHEVs are powered by conventional
fuels and by electrical energy stored in a
battery. Using electricity from the grid to
charge the battery some of the time costs
less and reduces petroleum consumption
compared with conventional vehicles.
PHEVs can also reduce emissions,
depending on the electricity source.
PHEVs have an internal combustion
engine or other propulsion source and an
electric motor, which uses energy stored
in a battery. PHEVs have larger battery
packs than HEVs, making it possible to
drive using only electric power (about 10
to 40 miles in current models). This is
commonly referred to as the all-electric
range of the vehicle.
PHEV batteries can be charged several
ways: by an outside electric power source,
by the internal combustion engine, or
through regenerative braking. If a PHEV
is never plugged in to charge, its fuel
economy will be about the same as that
of a similarly sized HEV. If the vehicle is
fully charged and then driven a shorter
distance than its all-electric range, it is
possible to use electric power only.
-All-Electric Vehicles
EVs use a battery to store the electrical
energy that powers the motor. EV batter-
ies are charged by plugging the vehicle
into an electric power source. Although
electricity production may contribute
to air pollution, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) considers EVs
to be zero-emission vehicles because their
motors produce no exhaust or emissions.
Since EVs use no other fuel, they help
reduce petroleum consumption.
Currently available EVs have a shorter
range per charge than most conventional
vehicles have per tank of gas. EV manu-
facturers typically target a minimum
range of 100 miles. According to the U.S.
Department of Transportation’s Federal
Highway Administration, 100 miles is
sufficient for more than 90% of all house-
hold vehicle trips in the United States.
Light-duty HEV, PHEV, and EV models
are currently available from a number
of auto manufacturers, with additional
models expected to be released in com-
ing years. There are also a variety of
medium- and heavy-duty options avail-
able. For up-to-date information on
available vehicle models, refer to the
Alternative Fuels and Advanced Vehicles
Data Center’s (AFDC) Electric Vehicle
Availability page (www.afdc.energy.gov/
afdc/vehicles/electric_availability.html) and
FuelEconomy.gov.