Digital Detox Guide

Do you check your email, texts, voicemails, Facebook, or Twitter feed
within an hour of waking up or going to sleep? While you’re in line at
the store? During dinner with your family? Would you check it at a
church while waiting for a funeral to start?
Do a little thought experiment with me here. Imagine yourself sitting in a public
place, not doing anything, just staring into space. How would you feel?
Although many of us spent most of our childhoods daydreaming, adulthood
seems to be about trying to keeping our minds from wandering, and trying to stay
on task. 

Rarely do we just let ourselves stare into
space these days. Look around: We can’t
even stand to wait at a stoplight for 10
seconds without checking our smartphones.
Why not? Because it’s uncomfortable for us
not to be doing anything. At the very least,
it’s boring.
More than being boring, however, downtime
and daydreaming are threatening to our
sense of self. If busyness and multi-tasking
and being pressed for time can be equated
with significance, success, and productivity
then downtime and daydreaming must be
signs of insignificance, failure, and
inefficiency. And when we feel insignificant
and unsuccessful, we also tend to feel guilty
for not working, ashamed that we aren’t important enough to be doing something,
and anxious about our status.
In the lab, these emotions are more painful than the actual physical pain of an
electric shock.
I’m endlessly fascinated by a series of studies led by Tim Wilson where the
research subjects were put alone in a room, with nothing to do. The researchers
describe their work:
In 11 studies, we found that participants typically did not enjoy spending 6
to 15 minutes in a room by themselves with nothing to do but think, that
they enjoyed doing mundane external activities much more, and that many
preferred to administer electric shocks to themselves instead of being left
alone with their thoughts. Most people seem to prefer to be doing
something rather than nothing, even if that something is negative.
You read that right: Many people (67 percent of men and 25 percent of women, to
be exact) actually gave themselves painful electric shocks instead of just sitting
there doing nothing–after they had indicated to the researchers that they would
pay money NOT to be shocked again. One guy shocked himself 190 times in 15
minutes.
When we can’t tolerate the feelings that come up when we aren’t doing anything,
or when we can’t tolerate a lack of stimulation, we feel uncomfortable when we
have downtime. As a result, we forfeit our downtime and all its benefits by seeking
external stimulation, which is usually readily available in our purse or pocket
(rather than an electric shock machine). Instead of just staring out the window on
the bus, we read through our Facebook feed. Instead of being alone with our
thoughts for a minute, we check our email waiting in line at the grocery store.
Instead of enjoying our dinner, we mindlessly shovel food in our mouths while
staring at a screen.

THE BENEFITS OF UNPLUGGING
In the grand scheme of things, digital usage rarely leads to meaning or fulfillment.
But unplugging for at least one day per week will make you happier (in addition to
giving you hours and hours to do the things that bring meaning to your life).
Here’s why:
1. Detoxing from social media and digital information promotes overall wellbeing and mental health. Social media use is associated with narcissism,
depression, loneliness, and other negative feelings like anger, envy, misery,
and frustration. So, it’s hardly surprising that taking a break for a few days
can improve our mood and overall happiness.
2. Your sleep will become more restorative, and sleep improves everything
from health and happiness to performance and productivity. Physiologically,
you’ll have an easier time sleeping because the low-energy blue light emitted
by our tablets and smartphones stimulates chemical messengers in our
brains that make us more alert and suppresses others (like melatonin) that
help us fall asleep. In addition, you’ll have an easier time sleeping because
you won’t be exciting your brain with new or stimulating information right
efore bedtime. Social media, messages, and email can easily trigger the
release of adrenalin, which makes it nearly impossible to fall asleep quickly.
And needless to say, the less time it takes you to fall asleep at night, the
more time you’ll have in the morning.
3. Bonus: You’ll feel less lonely and more connected, and feeling connected is
the best predictor of happiness that we have. Though we think social media
makes us feel more connected to others, ironically, it can also make us feel
quite alone. Seeing friends and acquaintances post about how happy they
are can actually trigger feelings of misery and loneliness, research shows.
The benefits of unplugging from time to time are clearly enormous. But if
unplugging isn’t undertaken properly, people often experience withdrawal
symptoms, like feelings of agitation, guilt, and a compulsive and distracting desire
to check our phones.

THE SCIENCE OF CHECKING
One survey found that 80% of 18 to 44-year-olds check their smartphones within
the first 15 minutes of waking up–and that 89% of younger users, those ages 18-
24, reach for their device within 15 minutes of waking up. Seventy-four percent
reach for it immediately after waking up. A quarter of those surveyed could not
recall a time during the day that their device was not within reach or in the same
room. Another study found that people tend to check their email about every 15
minutes; another found that in 2007 the average knowledge worker opened their
email 50 times a day, while using instant messaging 77 times a day—imagine what
that might be today, over a decade later, now that smartphones are ubiquitous
and given the evidence that we spend more time checking than ever before.
So, we check our smartphones constantly. Is that bad?
A study of college students at Kent State University found that people who check
their phones frequently tend to experience higher levels of distress during their
leisure time (when they intend to relax).

Similarly, Elizabeth Dunn and Kostadin Kushlev regulated how frequently
participants checked their email throughout the day. Those striving to check only
three times a day were less tense and less stressed overall.
Moreover, checking constantly reduces our productivity. All that checking
interrupts us from accomplishing our more important work; with each derailment,
it takes us on average about a half hour to get back on track.

So why do we check constantly, and first thing in the morning, if it just makes us
tense and keeps us from getting our work done? Because it also feels,
well…awesome. The Internet and electronic communications engage many of our
senses—often simultaneously. All that checking excites our brain, providing the
novelty and stimulation it adores. So even though disconnecting from the devices
and communications that make us tense and decrease our productivity seems like
a logical thing to do, your novelty-and-stimulation-seeking brain won’t want to do
it. In fact, it will tell you that you are being more productive when you are online
and connected to your messages than when you are disconnected and focusing on
something important.
This point is worth lingering on: how productive we are does not correlate well
with how productive we feel. Multitasking and checking a lot feel productive
because our brains are so stimulated when we are doing it. But it isn’t actually
productive; one Stanford study showed that while media multitaskers tended to
perceive themselves to be performing better, they actually tended to perform
worse on every measure the researchers studied.
Much of our checking and busyness, to paraphrase Shakespeare, is all sound and
fury, no meaning or significance. You can sit all day in front of your computer
checking and responding to email but accomplish not one of your priorities. It may 
feel like a more valuable activity, because it feels more productive. But it is
neither.
Now that we’ve established the benefits of unplugging and the dangers of
checking, here’s how to unplug in a way that will lead to the best weekend EVER.

Going unplugged for one day over the weekend will send many people into
withdrawal. They will literally experience jitters, anxiety, and discomfort akin to
physical pain. If you were in rehab for Opioid addiction, they might give you
medication (like Methadone) to ease the pain.
Unplugging is like a detox because the symptoms we experience when we stop
checking our phones compulsively are uncomfortable; remember, many people
would rather receive a painful electric shock than stand the pain of not checking,
of not being “productive.”
If you need rehab, here’s how to invent your own methadone. The idea is to do
something naturally rewarding for your brain to ease the boredom, anxiety, and
general twitchiness that tends to descend upon us when we unplug from
technology.

Unless you are some sort of superhero, you will not be able to cure yourself of your
internet/device/email addiction perfectly the first time. So what to do if you’re
struggling?
1. Don’t get too emotional about your slip or succumb to selfcriticism.
Instead, forgive yourself. Remind yourself that lapses are part of the
process, and that feeling guilty or bad about your behavior will not
increase your future success. 
2. Figure out what the problem is.
This may be blazingly obvious, but in order to do better tomorrow, you’ll
need to know what is causing your trip-ups. What temptation can you
remove? Were you stressed or tired or hungry—and if so, how can you
prevent that the next time?
3. Beware the “What the Hell” effect.
Say you’ve sworn not to check your email before breakfast, but you’ve
been online since your alarm went off…three hours ago. You’re now at
risk for what researchers formally call the Abstinence Violation Effect
(AVE) and jokingly call the “what the hell effect.” 
4. Rededicate yourself to your detox (now, in this instant, not
tomorrow).
Why do you want to make the changes that you do? How will you
benefit? Do a little deep breathing and calm contemplation of your
goals.
5. Beware of moral licensing.
This is a potential landmine to avoid on your better days: as you notice
how well you are doing staying unplugged, don’t let yourself feel so
good about the progress you are making that you unleash what
researchers call the “licensing effect.” 