Michael M.

1.0 out of 5 stars
Don't spend your hard on money on this garbage, you will regret it when it breaks within the
year.
Reviewed in the United States on February 8, 2024
If you want a TV that last and is user friendly DO NOT BUY Hisense. The of the HDMI ports failed
for no reason. The TV sat securely with a PC and a PS5 connected and both ports broke. Hisense
deemed it non-warranty because of a microscopic pinhole in the screen, which they also refused to
cover. The user interface if non-nonsensical, clunky, and awkward. At night I like to turn on the
auto-volume leveling (which isn't even very good, it's still fluctuates wildly in volume compared to
Visio) you will have to navigate through a maze of sub-menu'. During the day I would reverse the
process, it's not a user friendly TV, the menu's don't make sense, most of the settings don't have any
detail description just a cryptic one-word setting.
Bunny S.

1.0 out of 5 stars
Worst customer service ever!!
Purchased an 85 inch from Best Buy. Worked fine for a month or two then the sound started going
out I would have to literally turn the TV off and back on to get the sound they’ve been out twice and
they were a no-show on one appointment finally here it is December and I’ve gotten them to, tell me
the TV cannot be repaired. Still waiting for my money to be returned/refunded. The only person that
was nice was one of the repairman. You call the repair line and it was always a major ordeal. You
cannot speak to a supervisor, the worst experience I’ve ever had , I will never purchase another one
of their products ever again.

JP

1.0 out of 5 stars
Do not buy a TV from Hisense!!
I've had my TV for 2 years. I keep all documents when I buy large appliances because I know that if I
don't and they break I'd be SOL. Called Hisense the day my TV just stopped turning on and although
I sent them pictures of all my documents they said they needed a manager to review my case. Two
days later they texted me saying that my warranty was for the wrong TV and sent me a link to a web
page for a warranty they said was the right one. I texted back asking for someone to call and
explain. No one did. I called several days later and was hung up on, left on hold, and eventually told
they would not honor my warranty. Do not buy this TV. There was no reason for my TV to stop
working. Now I have a 70 inch wall weight.

Tracy L.

2.0 out of 5 stars
Good for a few

The TV works fine for a year or do then it won't work like it should. The apps won't work right or not
at all. The apps that are permanently on the TV you can't uninstall so you can reset the app. It won't
update at all. Over all it's a throw away TV good just to get by for a better one.
Tammy B.

1.0 out of 5 stars
Sucks
There is not one thing that I liked about that TV I thought the price was good but they could give me
another one for free and I wouldn't take it. The worst TV to try and figure out how to navigate I've
ever had and you couldn't get Alexa or The voice Assistant to work on it ever.
Tania A.

5.0 out of 5 stars
works excellent
just to need linking. i love it

Ernie

5.0 out of 5 stars
working great
make sure you set up everything with the same google account or alexa account if you dint you wont
see it on ur device
Jared B.

5.0 out of 5 stars
Easy to setup and works great
I setup my Hisense U75H Google TV to work with Alexa. Turned on and off TV, changed volume,
muted, unmuted. They all worked on the first command. I'm surprised so many people are having so
many issues.

Cole

5.0 out of 5 stars
It does work
after setup. sign out of hisense account then sign back in. it will prompt you to ebavke the tv and it
works great.
Eileen G.

5.0 out of 5 stars
Works, first attempt

This works for the Hisense 55U7G. Not sure about all of the negative reviews without model
numbers. l assume that many are working with models before Alexa enabling. I'm sure that it would
do more with a Fire TV. I'm working with Android TV in my model.

John S.

3.0 out of 5 stars
Log out and then enable skill again
the review below works. have to enable askoll, create hisense accout, then log out of Hisense, go
back to alexa enable akill, and the linking then works when gou log back in. Stupid it cant just work
the first time.
Ricardo

3.0 out of 5 stars
Works Great
The app works 100% with Alexa, I’m able to tell Alexa pretty much a lot of commands from turning
the tv on and off, control volume, etc.
Amazon Customer

3.0 out of 5 stars
More commands added but still lacking
When I first got this skill, it had zero functionality, but over time commands to turn the TV on and off
as well as adjust volume and change both the channel and the various inputs have come into play.
Still missing commands to open up specific apps, which would definitely make this app a must-have
for anyone with a Hisense.

Matt

3.0 out of 5 stars
Missing a major feature
it's a pain to setup, but it works.
So before you lose your mind, Go into network settings and change the "Wake-on-Lan/Wifi" to ON.
(Depends on how it's connected to the internet) and you'll be able to turn it on and off.
Unfortunately it doesn't start any apps. it's just on and off, change input, and control volume.

Juanito D.

3.0 out of 5 stars
It work.. barely halfway

It a little hard to set up, but in the same time is easy, just be ready in the time to setup with you
smarthphone and email ready to follow step by step. I saw many reviews saying the only thing do is
turn off the TV, no turn on, that's not a problem of the skill is just the tv setting. At least in my Hisense
Android TV at factory settings comes with the Wake on Wireless Network off, just turned on in
Network setting and can turn on the TV with Alexa commands. The only thing I can't do is change
the input with commands, in the skill setting tell I can do it but Alexa tell me: Can find any devices
who can do that. But the commands if tell the skill we can do work; can Turn on/off, modify Vol. and
activate apps.

