Cough is the most common illness-related reason for ambulatory care visits in the United States. Acute bronchitis is a clinical diagnosis characterized by cough due to acute inflammation of the trachea and large airways without evidence of pneumonia. Pneumonia should be suspected in patients with tachypnea, tachycardia, dyspnea, or lung findings suggestive of pneumonia, and radiography is warranted. Pertussis should be suspected in patients with cough persisting for more than two weeks that is accompanied by symptoms such as paroxysmal cough, whooping cough, and post-tussive emesis, or recent pertussis exposure. The cough associated with acute bronchitis typically lasts about two to three weeks, and this should be emphasized with patients. Acute bronchitis is usually caused by viruses, and antibiotics are not indicated in patients without chronic lung disease. Antibiotics have been shown to provide only minimal benefit, reducing the cough or illness by about half a day, and have adverse effects, including allergic reactions, nausea and vomiting, and Clostridium difficile infection. Evaluation and treatment of bronchitis include ruling out secondary causes for cough, such as pneumonia; educating patients about the natural course of the disease; and recommending symptomatic treatment and avoidance of unnecessary antibiotic use. Strategies to reduce inappropriate antibiotic use include delayed prescriptions, patient education, and calling the infection a chest cold.
 

 Acute bronchitis is most often caused by a viral infection.3,4 The most commonly identified viruses are rhinovirus, enterovirus, influenza A and B, parainfluenza, coronavirus, human metapneumovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus.3 Bacteria are detected in 1% to 10% of cases of acute bronchitis.3–5 Atypical bacteria, such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, and Bordetella pertussis, are rare causes of acute bronchitis. In a study of sputum samples of adults with acute cough for more than five days, M. pneumoniae was isolated in less than 1% of cases and C. pneumoniae was not identified.6
 

 Approximately 10% of patients presenting with a cough lasting at least two weeks have evidence of B. pertussis infection.7,8 During outbreaks, pertussis detection is more likely in children and those with prolonged coughs.6,9 Antibiotics can eradicate B. pertussis from the nasopharynx. They do not seem to shorten the course of illness unless given in the first one to two weeks.10 Isolated outbreaks of pertussis occur throughout the United States, and increased testing of adults and children should be considered during these periods.
 

 Cough is the predominant and defining symptom of acute bronchitis. The primary diagnostic consideration in patients with suspected acute bronchitis is ruling out more serious causes of cough, such as asthma, exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart failure, or pneumonia. The diagnoses that have the most overlap with acute bronchitis are upper respiratory tract infections and pneumonia. Whereas acute bronchitis and the common cold are self-limited illnesses that do not require antibiotic treatment, the standard therapy for pneumonia is antibiotics.
 

 Besides cough, other signs and symptoms of acute bronchitis include sputum production, dyspnea, nasal congestion, headache, and fever.4,11,12 The first few days of an acute bronchitis infection may be indistinguishable from the common cold. Patients may have substernal or chest wall pain when coughing. Fever is not a typical finding after the first few days, and presence of a fever greater than 100°F (37.8°C) should prompt consideration of influenza or pneumonia. Production of sputum, even purulent, is common and does not correlate with bacterial infection.13,14
 

 Because the cough associated with bronchitis is so bothersome and slow to resolve, patients often seek treatment. Patients and clinicians may underestimate the time required to fully recover from acute bronchitis.15 The duration of acute bronchitis–related cough is typically two to three weeks, with a pooled estimate of 18 days in one systematic review.15 This corresponds to results of a prospective trial, which found that patients who had a cough for at least five days had a median of 18 days of coughing.16
 

 On physical examination, patients with acute bronchitis may be mildly ill-appearing, and fever is present in about one-third of patients.4,11 Lung auscultation may reveal wheezes, as well as rhonchi that typically improve with coughing. It is important to rule out pneumonia. High fever; moderate to severe ill-appearance; hypoxia; and signs of lung consolidation, such as decreased breath sounds, bronchial breath sounds, crackles, egophony, and increased tactile fremitus, are concerning for pneumonia. Pneumonia is unlikely in nonfrail older adults who have normal vital signs and normal lung examination findings.17–20