Raymond James & Associates, Inc.
Tandy G. Lewis, CFP®, WMS
Managing Director, Investments
333 Texas Street, Suite 175
Shreveport, LA 71101
318-677-5518
866-297-6576
tandy.lewis@raymondjames.com
https://bowenlewis.com
Estate Planning
Basics
April 26, 2016
Estate Planning--An Introduction
By definition, estate planning is a process
designed to help you manage and preserve
your assets while you are alive, and to
conserve and control their distribution after
your death according to your goals and
objectives. But what estate planning means to
you specifically depends on who you are. Your
age, health, wealth, lifestyle, life stage, goals,
and many other factors determine your
particular estate planning needs. For example,
you may have a small estate and may be
concerned only that certain people receive
particular things. A simple will is probably all
you'll need. Or, you may have a large estate,
and minimizing any potential estate tax impact
is your foremost goal. Here, you'll need to use
more sophisticated techniques in your estate
plan, such as a trust.
To help you understand what estate planning
means to you, the following sections address
some estate planning needs that are common
among some very broad groups of individuals.
Think of these suggestions as simply a point
in the right direction, and then seek
professional advice to implement the right plan
for you.
Over 18
Since incapacity can strike anyone at anytime,
all adults over 18 should consider having:
•    A durable power of attorney: This
document lets you name someone to
manage your property for you in case you
become incapacitated and cannot do so.
•    An advanced medical directive: The three
main types of advanced medical directives
are (1) a living will, (2) a durable power of
attorney for health care (also known as a
health-care proxy), and (3) a Do Not
Resuscitate order. Be aware that not all
states allow each kind of medical directive,
so make sure you execute one that will be
effective for you.
Young and single
If you're young and single, you may not need
much estate planning. But if you have some
material possessions, you should at least write
a will. If you don't, the wealth you leave behind
if you die will likely go to your parents, and
that might not be what you would want. A will
lets you leave your possessions to anyone
you choose (e.g., your significant other,
siblings, other relatives, or favorite charity).
Unmarried couples
You've committed to a life partner but aren't
legally married. For you, a will is essential if
you want your property to pass to your partner
at your death. Without a will, state law directs
that only your closest relatives will inherit your
property, and your partner may get nothing. If
you share certain property, such as a house or
car, you might consider owning the property
as joint tenants with rights of survivorship.
That way, when one of you dies, the jointly
held property will pass to the surviving partner
automatically.
Married couples
For many years, married couples had to do
careful estate planning, such as the creation
of a credit shelter trust, in order to take
advantage of their combined federal estate tax
exclusions. A new law passed in 2010 allows
the executor of a deceased spouse's estate to
transfer any unused estate tax exclusion
amount to the surviving spouse without such
planning. This provision is effective for estates
of decedents dying in 2011 and later years.
You may be inclined to rely on these
portability rules for estate tax avoidance, using
outright bequests to your spouse instead of
traditional trust planning. However, portability
should not be relied upon solely for utilization
of the first to die's estate tax exemption, and a
credit shelter trust created at the first spouse's
death may still be advantageous for several
reasons:
•    Portability may be lost if the surviving
spouse remarries and is later widowed
again
•    The trust can protect any appreciation of
assets from estate tax at the second
spouse's death
•    The trust can provide protection of assets
from the reach of the surviving spouse's
creditors
•    Portability does not apply to the
generation-skipping transfer (GST) tax, so
the trust may be needed to fully leverage
the GST exemptions of both spouses
Married couples where one spouse is not a
U.S. citizen have special planning concerns.
The marital deduction is not allowed if the
recipient spouse is a non-citizen spouse, but a
$148,000 (in 2016, $147,000 in 2015) annual
exclusion is allowed. If certain requirements
By definition, estate
planning is a process
designed to help you
manage and preserve your
assets while you are alive,
and to conserve and control
their distribution after your
death according to your
goals and objectives.
Page 2 of 7, see disclaimer on final page
are met, however, a transfer to a qualified
domestic trust (QDOT) will qualify for the
marital deduction.
Married with children
If you're married and have children, you and
your spouse should each have your own will.
For you, wills are vital because you can name
a guardian for your minor children in case both
of you die simultaneously. If you fail to name a
guardian in your will, a court may appoint
someone you might not have chosen.
Furthermore, without a will, some states
dictate that at your death some of your
property goes to your children and not to your
spouse. If minor children inherit directly, the
surviving parent will need court permission to
manage the money for them. You may also
want to consult an attorney about establishing
a trust to manage your children's assets.
You may also need life insurance. Your
surviving spouse may not be able to support
the family on his or her own and may need to
replace your earnings to maintain the family.
Comfortable and looking
forward to retirement
You've accumulated some wealth and you're
thinking about retirement. Here's where estate
planning overlaps with retirement planning. It's
just as important to plan to care for yourself
during your retirement as it is to plan to
provide for your beneficiaries after your death.
You should keep in mind that even though
Social Security may be around when you
retire, those benefits alone may not provide
enough income for your retirement years.
Wealthy and worried
Depending on the size of your estate, you may
need to be concerned about estate taxes.
Estates of $5,450,000 (in 2016, $5,430,000 in
2015) are effectively exempt from the federal
gift and estate tax. Estates over that amount
may be subject to the tax at a top rate of 40
percent.
Similarly, there is another tax, called the
generation-skipping transfer (GST) tax, that is
imposed on transfers of wealth that are made
to grandchildren (and lower generations). The
GST tax exemption is $5,450,000 (in 2016,
$5,430,000 in 2015) and the GST tax rate is
40 percent.
Whether your estate will be subject to state
death taxes depends on the size of your
estate and the tax laws in effect in the state in
which you are domiciled.
Elderly or ill
If you're elderly or ill, you'll want to write a will
or update your existing one, consider a
revocable living trust, and make sure you have
a durable power of attorney and a health-care
directive. Talk with your family about your
wishes, and make sure they have copies of
your important papers or know where to locate
them.
Consider saving some of your accumulated
wealth using other retirement and deferred
vehicles, such as an individual retirement
account (IRA).
Page 3 of 7, see disclaimer on final page
Steps to Estate Planning Success
Estate Planning Pyramid
Page 4 of 7, see disclaimer on final page
Advantages of Trusts
Why you might consider
discussing trusts with your
attorney
•    Trusts may be used to minimize estate
taxes for married individuals with
substantial assets.
•    Trusts provide management assistance for
your heirs.*
•    Contingent trusts for minors (which take
effect in the event that both parents die)
may be used to avoid the costs of having a
court-appointed guardian to manage your
children's assets.
•    Properly funded trusts avoid many of the
administrative costs of probate (e.g.,
attorney fees, document filing fees).
•    Generally, revocable living trusts will keep
the distribution of your estate private.
•    Trusts can be used to dispense income to
•    Trusts can ensure that assets go to your
intended beneficiaries. For example, if you
have children from a prior marriage you
can make sure that they, as well as a
current spouse, are provided for.
•    Trusts can minimize income taxes by
allowing the shifting of income among
beneficiaries.
•    Properly structured irrevocable life
insurance trusts can provide liquidity for
estate settlement needs while removing the
policy proceeds from estate taxation at the
death of the insured.
*This is particularly important for minors and
incapacitated adults who may need support,
maintenance, and/or education over a long
period of time, or for adults who have difficulty
managing money.
intermediate beneficiaries (e.g., children,
elderly parents) before final property
distribution.
Conducting a Periodic Review of Your Estate Plan
With your estate plan successfully
implemented, one final but critical step
remains: carrying out a periodic review and
update.
Imagine this: since you implemented your
estate plan five years ago, you got divorced
and remarried, sold your house and bought a
boat to live on, sold your legal practice and
invested the money that provides you with
enough income so you no longer have to
work, and reconciled with your estranged
daughter. This scenario may look more like
fantasy than reality, but imagine how these
major changes over a five-year period may
affect your estate. And that's without
considering changes in tax laws, the stock
market, the economic climate, or other
external factors. After all, if the only constant
is change, it isn't unreasonable to speculate
that your wishes have changed, the
advantages you sought have eroded or
vanished, or even that new opportunities now
exist that could offer a better value for your
estate. A periodic review can give you peace
of mind.
When should you conduct a
review of your estate plan?
Every year for large estates
Those of you with large estates (i.e., more
than the federal or your state's exemption
amount, whichever is smaller) should review
your plan annually or at certain life events that
are suggested in the following paragraphs.
Not a year goes by without significant changes
in the tax laws. You need to stay on top of
these to get the best results.
Every five years for small estates
Those of you with smaller estates (under the
applicable exclusion amount) need only
review every five years or following changes in
your life events. Your estate will not be as
affected by economic factors and changes in
the tax laws as a larger estate might be.
However, your personal situation is bound to
change, and reviewing every five years will
bring your plan up to date with your current
situation.
Upon changes in estate valuation
If the value of your estate has changed more
than 20 percent over the last two years, you
may need to update your estate plan.
Upon economic changes
You need to review your estate plan if there
has been a change in the value of your assets
or your income level or requirements, or if you
are retiring.
What is a trust?
A trust is a legal entity that is
created for the purpose of
transferring property to a
trustee for the benefit of a third
person (beneficiary). The
trustee manages the property
for the beneficiary according to
the terms specified in the trust
With your estate plan
successfully implemented,
one final but critical step
remains: carrying out a
periodic review and update.
Page 5 of 7, see disclaimer on final page
Upon changes in occupation or
employment
If you or your spouse changed jobs, you may
need to make revisions in your estate plan.
Upon changes in family situations
You need to update your plan if: (1) your (or
your children's or grandchildren's) marital
status has changed, (2) a child (or grandchild)
has been born or adopted, (3) your spouse,
child, or grandchild has died, (4) you or a
close family member has become ill or
incapacitated, or (5) other individuals (e.g.,
your parents) have become dependent on
you.
Upon changes in your closely held
business interest
A review is in order if you have: (1) formed,
purchased, or sold a closely held business, (2)
reorganized or liquidated a closely held
business, (3) instituted a pension plan, (4)
executed a buy-sell agreement, (5) deferred
compensation, or (6) changed employee
benefits.
Upon changes in the estate plan
Of course, if you make a change in part of
your estate plan (e.g., create a trust, execute
a codicil, etc.), you should review the estate
plan as a whole to ensure that it remains
cohesive and effective.
Upon major transactions
Be sure to check your plan if you have: (1)
Upon changes in insurance coverage
Making changes in your insurance coverage
may change your estate planning needs or
may make changes necessary. Therefore,
inform your estate planning advisor if you
make any change to life insurance, health
insurance, disability insurance, medical
insurance, liability insurance, or beneficiary
designations.
Upon death of trustee/executor/guardian
If a designated trustee, executor, or guardian
dies or changes his or her mind about serving,
you need to revise the parts of your estate
plan affected (e.g., the trust agreement and
your will) to replace that individual.
Upon other important changes
None of us has a crystal ball. We can't think of
all the conditions that should prompt us to
review and revise our estate plans. Use your
common sense. Have your feelings about
charity changed? Has your son finally become
financially responsible? Has your spouse's
health been declining? Are your children
through college now? All you need to do is
give it a little thought from time to time, and
take action when necessary.
received a sizable inheritance, bequest, or
similar disposition, (2) made or received
substantial gifts, (3) borrowed or lent
substantial amounts of money, (4) purchased,
leased, or sold material assets or investments,
(5) changed residences, (6) changed
significant property ownership, or (7) become
involved in a lawsuit.
Page 6 of 7, see disclaimer on final page
Raymond James & Associates,
Inc.
Tandy G. Lewis, CFP®, WMS
Managing Director,
Investments
333 Texas Street, Suite 175
Shreveport, LA 71101
318-677-5518
866-297-6576
tandy.lewis@raymondjames.com
https://bowenlewis.com
April 26, 2016
Prepared by Broadridge Investor Communication Solutions, Inc. Copyright 2016
This information was developed by Broadridge, an independent third party. It is general in nature, is not a
complete statement of all information necessary for making an investment decision, and is not a
recommendation or a solicitation to buy or sell any security. Investments and strategies mentioned may not
be suitable for all investors. Past performance may not be indicative of future results. Raymond James &
Associates, Inc. member New York Stock Exchange/SIPC does not provide advice on tax, legal or mortgage
issues. These matters should be
discussed with an appropriate professional.
Page 7 of 7
