Who pays whom, as well as who can sue whom for copyright infringement, depends in part on 
the mode of listening to music. Rights owners of sound recordings (e.g., record labels) pay music 
publishers for the right to record and distribute the publishers’ musical works in a physical
format.27 Retail outlets that sell digital files or physical reproductions of sound recordings pay the 
distribution subsidiaries of major record labels, which act as wholesalers.28 Purchasers of a 
lawfully made reproduction, such as a compact disc or a digital file, may listen to that song as 
often as they wish in a private setting.
Radio listeners have less control over when and where they listen to a song than they would if 
they purchased the song outright. The Copyright Act does not require broadcast radio stations to 
pay public performance royalties to record labels and artists, but it does require them to pay 
public performance royalties to music publishers and songwriters for the use of notes and lyrics in 
broadcast music. 
In addition to mechanical rights, digital services must pay both record labels and music publishers 
for public performance rights. Both traditional broadcast radio stations and music streaming 
services that limit the ability of users to choose which songs they hear next (noninteractive 
services) may make temporary reproductions of songs in the normal course of transmitting music 
to listeners.29 The rights to make these temporary reproductions, known as “ephemeral 
reproductions,” fall under 17 U.S.C. Section 112 (see “Ephemeral Reproductions”).
Users of an “on demand” or “interactive” music streaming service can listen to songs upon 
request, an experience similar in some ways to playing a compact disc and in other ways to 
listening to a radio broadcast. To enable multiple listeners to select songs, the services download
digital files to consumers’ devices. These digital reproductions are known as “conditional” or 
“tethered” downloads, because consumers’ ability to listen to them upon request is conditioned 
upon remaining subscribers to the interactive services.30 The services pay royalties to music 
publishers or songwriters for the right to reproduce and distribute the musical works, and pay 
royalties to record labels or artists for the right to reproduce and distribute sound recordings.31
Thus, while record labels reproduce and distribute their own sound recordings in physical form, they license such rights to interactive digital streaming services when the music is in digital 
form.