Notwithstanding the foregoing state laws, any activity involving marijuana that is not authorized under
the CSA remains a federal crime anywhere in the United States, including in states that have purported to
legalize medical or recreational marijuana. The Supreme Court has held that state laws authorizing
medical marijuana use do not affect the CSA’s restrictions. Thus, when states “legalize” a federally
controlled substance such as marijuana, the sole result is that the substance is no longer controlled under
state law. As discussed in another Legal Sidebar, moving marijuana from Schedule I to Schedule III,
without other legal changes, would have some impact on marijuana users and businesses but would not
bring the state-legal medical or recreational marijuana industry into compliance with federal controlled
substances law.
Activities that violate the CSA may give rise to federal criminal prosecution. As a practical matter,
however, DEA and DOJ lack the resources to prosecute all violations of the CSA. DOJ guidance
memoranda from the Obama Administration broadly affirmed federal authority to prosecute such
activities but also indicated that DOJ would generally not prioritize prosecution of activities involving
medical marijuana that complied with state law. Under the Trump Administration, DOJ rescinded that
guidance, instead reaffirming the authority of federal prosecutors to exercise prosecutorial discretion to
target federal marijuana offenses “in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations, and
appropriations.” DOJ has not issued formal guidance on marijuana policy during the Biden
Administration, but Attorney General Merrick Garland has indicated that the agency will not prioritize
prosecuting individuals for personal use of marijuana. Notwithstanding the changes in guidance, data
from the U.S. Sentencing Commission indicate that the number of federal marijuana trafficking
prosecutions decreased every year between FY2018 and FY2022.The reference to appropriations in the DOJ guidance is significant, because in each budget cycle since
FY2015, Congress has passed an appropriations rider barring DOJ from using taxpayer funds to prevent
states from “implementing their own laws that authorize the use, distribution, possession, or cultivation of
medical marijuana.” The appropriations rider thus prohibits federal prosecution of state-legal activities
involving medical marijuana. However, it poses no bar to prosecution of activities involving recreational
marijuana. Moreover, the rider does not remove criminal liability; it merely prevents enforcement of the
CSA in certain circumstances. As the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has explained, if
Congress repealed the appropriations rider, DOJ would be able to prosecute violations of the CSA that
occurred while the rider was in effect, subject to the applicable statute of limitations.
Even absent criminal prosecution or conviction, individuals and organizations engaged in marijuanarelated activities in violation of the CSA—including participants in the state-legal cannabis industry—
may face collateral consequences arising from the federal prohibition of marijuana. Other federal laws
impose legal consequences based on criminal activity, including violations of the CSA. For example, a
financial institution handling income from an illegal marijuana business may violate federal anti-money
laundering laws. The presence of income from a marijuana-related business may also prevent a
bankruptcy court from confirming a bankruptcy plan (though courts have split on the issue). Likewise,
marijuana businesses may be ineligible for certain federal tax deductions. (This restriction applies only to
activities involving substances in Schedule I or II, so moving marijuana to Schedule III would allow
marijuana businesses to deduct business expenses on federal tax filings.)For individuals, participation in the state-legal marijuana industry may have adverse immigration
consequences. Violations of the CSA may also affect individuals’ ability to receive certain federal
government benefits. In addition, federal law prohibits gun ownership and possession by any person who
is an “unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance,” with no exception for users of state-legal
medical marijuana.