1. Introduction
This step-by-step guide helps you select the best cameras for your operational requirements and
surveillance scenarios.
Lack of industry standards and the complexity of the matter cause many integrators to lose sight of a
key prerequisite in any installation: the operational requirements or the true purpose of the surveillance.
In this guide, we present the Pixel Density Model – a method that allows you to relate the operational
requirements of your system to modern surveillance video and IP cameras.
2. Moving into IP
Selecting the appropriate surveillance camera to fulfill operational requirements has always been
a challenge.
With the introduction of IP cameras, and especially through the development of megapixel and HDTV
cameras, the need has emerged for a new way to determine how to meet operational requirements. In
these six steps, we describe a model to relate operational requirements to modern video and IP cameras.
When recommending cameras and discussing what is the “best” camera on the market, it is easy to
focus on datasheets and technical specifications. This causes many integrators to lose sight of a key
prerequisite in any installation, namely the operational requirements or the actual purpose of the surveillance.
Previously when surveillance was all analog, selecting a camera to match an operational requirement
was mostly about selecting the appropriate lens since there wasn’t a wide variety of resolutions to
choose from. Most CCTV systems are designed to monitor human behavior, so the human body was used
as a yardstick. In order to differentiate between diverse types of scenarios, various categories were established based on percentage representation of the height of a human body within the field of view.
While not a global standard in any way, it became quite common to distinguish between the need for
detection, recognition, and identification.
As correct as the percentages in Figure 1 might be for a standard analog resolution, they pose a few
challenges when moving into the diverse resolutions of IP cameras. To bridge the gap, attempts have
been made to translate from TV lines to pixels to produce tables like the one shown in Figure 2, where
the way of thinking about analog operational requirements in terms of percentages has been translated
for IP. This might be correct, but it is difficult – if not impossible – to work with complexity such as this
in a real-life context. Surely there must be a better way
3. Pixel density
The growth of IP surveillance forces us to a make paradigm shift in the way we define our operational requirements.
Advancements in camera technology have resulted in a multitude of resolutions and formats. Instead of
using vertical height and percentage, we should focus on pixel density in the horizontal dimension. The
term pixel density in this context refers to the number of pixels representing the object of our operational requirement – commonly a human, or more specifically, a human face.
One reason why we have chosen to use the face is its distinct identifying features. Furthermore, the
variances in face widths are less than those of body lengths or widths, which results in a smaller margin
of error. The average human face is 16 centimeters wide (= 6.3 inches wide). Following suggested operational requirements from SKL, the Swedish National Laboratory of Forensic Science, and supported
by our own test results at Axis Communications, we have chosen to use 80 pixels as the requirement for
facial identification for challenging conditions . (see Figure 3).
To some, this number might sound high, and in fact some vendors or independent sources recommend
40 pixels for a face or 100 pixels per foot for recognition. The argument behind the higher number is that
for identification, there are limited other telltale signs. For recognition, previous knowledge adds factors
such as how a person moves – a property easy to observe and recognize, but difficult to identify and
describe accurately. To ensure sufficient video quality even if the object isn’t facing the camera straight
on, or if the lighting is not optimal, the higher number provides an adequate safety margin.
1
Challenging conditions: Situations with very varying or weak lighting. People, objects and vehicles are seen from an angle where details are in
shade, or facing away from the camera. It could also occur in situations where people, objects and vehicles are moving at very high speed through
an area. More often occurring in outdoor situations without additional lighting, or indoor situations during very dark conditions.
2
See European Standard EN 50132-7:2012 by CENELEC www.cenelec.eu
3
Good conditions: Situations with decent lighting. People, objects and vehicles are moving at reasonable speed, and seen from an angle where
sufficient details are visible. More often occurring in indoor situations where lighting is even, or outdoor situations with additional lighting.