BIAS IN POLICING
Bias in the American legal system includes biases in law enforcement or policing, where
racial disparities have long been documented and continue to persist. Compared with
White Americans, Black and Latino men are disproportionately more likely to be
stopped, searched, and arrested by police officers (Kahn & Martin 2016). Furthermore,
members of these minority groups also experience greater use of force by the police
(Goff & Kahn 2012, Kahn et al. 2016). Recently, a string of high-profile deadly cases
involving Black men like Michael Brown, Eric Garner, and Walter Scott has increased
public awareness of these hostile interactions with law enforcement. An initial analysis
of public records revealed that non-White minorities made up almost half (47%) of all
people killed by the police, despite comprising only 37% of the population. Furthermore,
of those killed, 32% of Blacks and 25% of Latinos were unarmed, compared with 15% of
Whites (Swaine et al. 2015). This troubling pattern of statistics has called into question
the role that race may play in police decisions.
Psychological research has examined this important social issue by directly
investigating the content of racial stereotypes, as well as indirectly assessing how these
associations affect perceptions and behavior. Self-report surveys have indicated that
hostility, violence, and criminality are commonly associated with Black Americans, even
by egalitarian-minded White Americans (Devine 1989, Devine & Elliot 1995, Dovidio et
al. 1986). Additionally, priming low-prejudiced individuals with Black versus White stimuli
typically results in the faster categorization of negative than positive attributes (e.g.,
Fazio et al. 1995, Greenwald et al. 1998, Wittenbrink et al. 1997). Together, these
findings suggest that awareness of social stereotypes and exposure to stigmatized
group members can affect decision making.
The Impact of Race on Weapon and Crime Perception
Applying the above rationale to police contexts, Payne (2001) developed the Weapons
Identification Task (WIT) to better understand the psychological mechanisms that may
drive racially biased shootings. This sequential priming procedure involves a series of
trials that begin with the presentation of a Black or White face, which participants are
instructed to ignore. After 200 ms, the prime is replaced by the target stimulus, which is
a picture of either a tool or a handgun. Participants must correctly categorize the object
as quickly as possible using one of two computer keys. Across two initial studies, Payne
(2001) found evidence of racial bias in both the reaction times and error rates. Following
the presentation of a Black versus White facial prime, participants were faster to
correctly identify a gun and more likely to misidentify a tool as a gun, depending on the
implementation of a response deadline. The results revealed that the racial primes had
an automatic influence on the visual identification of weapons (see also Amodio et al.
2004, Klauer & Voss 2008, Payne et al. 2002). As such, Payne (2001) proposed that
law enforcement officers may experience bias through the activation of Black
stereotypes, especially when the cognitive resources needed to engage behavioral
control are depleted.
Correll et al. (2002) extended this line of inquiry by developing a video game that
similarly examines the impact of race on weapon processing. In their first-person
Shooter Task, participants are randomly presented with a range of one to four real-life
photos of public spaces (e.g., parks, offices, courtyards). On the final image, a Black or
White male target suddenly appears superimposed holding either a handgun or an
innocuous object like a cell phone, soda can, or wallet. Participants must quickly press
either a “shoot” or “don't shoot” button on their computer keyboard. When participants
are given 850 ms to respond, they are faster to shoot armed Blacks versus Whites and
slower to not shoot unarmed Blacks compared with Whites. However, providing
participants with a 630-ms deadline results in a biased pattern of errors, such that
unarmed Blacks are more likely to be incorrectly shot than their White counterparts and
armed Whites are less likely to be shot than armed Black targets (see Correll et al.
2014, Mekawi & Bresin 2015). Biased responses were due to participants having lower
thresholds for shooting Black compared with White targets (see also Greenwald et al.
2003). Furthermore, the magnitude of shooter bias was related to cultural awareness of
Black stereotypes related to danger, violence, and aggression. Consequently, African
American participants demonstrated the same pattern of shooter bias, despite holding
presumably more positive attitudes about their group. These findings suggest that
decisions to shoot may be strongly influenced by negative racial schemas that affect
perceptions in ambiguous situations.
Additional research supports the notion that racial stereotypes may serve as perceptual
tuners that direct attention in a biased manner. Eberhardt et al. (2004) conducted a
series of studies examining how associations between Blacks and crime affected visual
processing. In their first study, undergraduates were subliminally primed with a photo of
a Black male face, a White male face, or no face at all before completing a supposedly
unrelated object detection task. On this critical task, severely degraded images of
crime-relevant (e.g., guns, knives) or -irrelevant (e.g., phones, keys) objects appeared
on the screen and slowly increased in clarity. Participants needed fewer frames to
accurately detect a crime-relevant object following a Black versus White or no-face
prime, a pattern of bias that was not related to their explicit racial attitudes. These
results were replicated among California police officers who were primed with crime
words (e.g., arrest, shoot) and then tested for their memory of the distractor face
presented on the task. Compared with the correct image, officers were more likely to
incorrectly choose a Black target with more stereotypical features following the crime
primes. Early perceptual processes of the police may therefore be impacted by cultural
associations that produce racial profiling of suspects and bias their subsequent
treatment.
Plant & Peruche (2005) also used actual law enforcement officers in their research to
examine how race influenced their responses to criminal suspects. Police officers
completed a more static version of the Shooter Task in which only photos of Black or
White male faces appeared with a gun or object superimposed without a background
image. The researchers wanted to examine whether repeated exposure to the program
would reduce the bias expressed by the officers. As in past studies with undergraduate
participants (e.g., Correll et al. 2002), the police were initially more likely to shoot
unarmed Black versus White targets and had a lower threshold for shooting Black
targets. However, this biased tendency disappeared in the second half of trials,
signifying that officers learned to dissociate race from the presence of weapons to make
more accurate decisions on the task.
The potential benefit of expert police training on performance is further supported by the
findings of Correll et al. (2007b), who compared the performance of three different
samples: Denver community members, Denver police officers, and national police
officers. In contrast to citizens who demonstrated bias in both their reaction time and
error rates, police officers demonstrated it only in their response latencies. In other
words, police officers did not make racially biased mistakes on the task but were still
faster to shoot armed Black men and slower to not shoot unarmed Black targets. This
shooter bias was more pronounced among officers serving high-crime areas with larger
Black and minority populations. The findings suggest that exposure to negative racial
stereotypes can impact the speed with which police officers make decisions, but that
their extensive training and field experience may allow them to exert more control over
their behavior than regular citizens.
In sum, independent labs have accumulated a considerable amount of evidence that
race can impact crime-oriented perceptions and bias subsequent decision making. Yet,
findings are often mixed when comparing data obtained from police officers versus
undergraduate or civilian samples. Under certain circumstances, the police express a
similar magnitude of racial bias as individuals not in law enforcement; in other
situations, their prior experience helps them limit the influence of stereotypes.
Beyond the Impact of Race
The mixed results discussed above point to the importance of conducting research that
considers factors other than race to more fully understand the complexity of real-life
police decision making. To this end, some studies have explored how personal
motivations, situational contexts, and physical cues may attenuate or exacerbate the
expression of racial bias.
Personal motivation. Research that has examined motivational processes
demonstrates that responses to race are not uniformly biased. For example, Payne
(2001) found that motivation to control prejudice moderated the relationship between
explicit measures of bias and performance on the WIT. Participants with low motivation
to control prejudice tended to show a positive correlation between modern scores of
racism and task performance. However, those with higher motivation levels tended to
show a dissociation between explicit and implicit bias, indicating a regulatory effort to
override stereotyping effects. Similarly, Amodio and colleagues (2006, 2008) have
examined the impact of internal (personal) versus external (normative) motivations to
respond without prejudice. Participants in their studies completed the WIT while having
their brain activity recorded. The data indicated that internally motivated participants
responded more accurately on the task, particularly following stereotypical errors.
Because this neural activity occurred below conscious awareness, the researchers
proposed that some individuals are able to engage a spontaneous form of control that
helps reduce the influence of race on behavior.
In contrast, Swencionis & Goff (2017) proposed that the motivation to view the world in
hierarchical terms may increase bias in police decisions. Social Dominance Theory
(Sidanius & Pratto 1999) posits that group-based inequalities are maintained by cultural
influences that promote social stratification based on factors such as age, sex, and
race. Consequently, power is primarily distributed to and legitimized by high-status
groups and institutions. Past work has found that people with high social dominance
orientation (SDO) are more attracted to hierarchy-enhancing professions, such as law
enforcement, politics, and business (Sidanius et al. 2004). Given that police officers
tend to report greater SDO levels than public defenders, college students, or community
members (Sidanius et al. 1994), they may be more prone to expressing discrimination
against low-status groups.
Situational contexts. Recognizing that police decisions do not occur in a social
vacuum, some researchers have attempted to recreate ecologically valid situations that
may contribute to the expression of racial bias. For example, Correll et al. (2007a)
reasoned that frequent media or environmental exposure to stereotypical depictions of
Blacks may increase shooter bias. In line with their hypothesizing, they found that
participants who were first exposed to stories involving Black versus White criminal
activity later showed more bias on the Shooter Task. A similar pattern emerged when
they manipulated the amount of Black armed and White unarmed targets appearing on
the task. Thus, increasing the accessibility of associations between Blacks and danger
resulted in more pronounced anti-Black bias.
Cox et al. (2014) also argued for the use of more complex situational contexts to assess
various psychological factors that influence real-life decisions. To this end, they
developed a modified version of the Shooter Task that used short video clips along with
static photos of the suspect and recorded responses through a gun apparatus instead of
computer keys. Because the police usually have prior knowledge and expectations
about neighborhoods, they also manipulated where the crimes on the task supposedly
took place by providing the exact city location. Wisconsin police officers were randomly
assigned to complete the task imbedded within a primarily White or non-White
neighborhood. When examining responses on photo trials, the researchers found that
police officers did not make racially biased errors but were faster to shoot armed Black
versus White targets, as in the work by Correll et al. (2007b). Interestingly, they also
found that the composition of the neighborhood interacted with the race of the officers,
such that more errors were made when officers were assigned to other-race areas.
