U.S. Department of Labor
 Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs
 Procedure Manual
 Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (DFEC)
 FECA Part 2 
 6. To and From Work. Employees do not generally have the protection of the FECA when injured while en route between work and home.
 a. Exceptions. There are five well-established exceptions to this general rule. These exceptions are:
 (1) Where the employment requires the employee to travel;
 (2) Where the employer contracts for and furnishes transportation to and from work;
 (3) Where the employee is subject to emergency duty, as in the case of firefighters;
 (4) Where the employee uses the highway or public transportation to do something incidental to employment with the knowledge and approval of the employer; and
 (5) Where the employee is required to travel during a curfew established by local, municipal, county or state authorities because of civil disturbances or for other reasons.
 b. Where the Employment Requires the Employee to Travel. This situation will not occur in the case of an employee having a fixed place of employment unless on an errand or special mission. It usually involves an employee who performs all or most of the work away from the industrial premises, such as a chauffeur, truck driver, or messenger. In cases of this type the official superior should be requested to submit a supplemental statement fully describing the employee's assigned duties and showing how and in what manner the work required the employee to travel, whether on the highway or by public transportation. In injury cases a similar statement should be obtained from the injured employee.
 c. Where the Employer Contracts for and Furnishes Transportation to and from Work. Where this expectation is claimed, the official superior should be requested to submit a supplemental statement showing, with appropriate explanation, whether the employee's transportation was furnished or otherwise provided by contract by contract by the employer. In injury cases a similar statement should be obtained from the injured employee. Also see Program Memorandum 104 dated October 24, 1969.
 The Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-59) amends Title 31, Section 1344 of the U.S. Code to allow Federal agencies in the National Capitol Region to pay for the costs of shuttle buses or other means of transportation between the place of employment and mass transit facilities. The bill statues that for "purpose of any determination under chapter 81 of title 5 ... an individual shall not be considered to be 'in the performance of duty' or 'acting within the scope of his or her employment' by virtue of the fact that such individual is receiving transportation services" under this legislation.
 IF it is determined that a shuttle bus or other means of transportation to and from mass transit is authorized under this statue, then the injury is not considered to have occurred within the performance of duty. When requesting information from the agency about the employer-provided conveyance, the agency should be asked whether the service in question was provided pursuant to the above statutory authority.
 d. Where the Employee is Subject to Emergency Duty.
 (1) When it is alleged that the employee was subject to emergency duty, the official superior should be requested to submit:
 (a) A copy of the injured employee's official position description, or other document showing that as the occasion arose, the duties did in fact require the performance of emergency duty; and
 (b) A specific statement showing that at the time of the injury the employee was in fact traveling to or from work because of emergency duty.
 (2) In disability cases, a statement from the injured employee should be requested showing whether at the time of the injury the employee was in fact going to or from work because of emergency duty.
 e. Where the Employee Uses the Highway or Public Transportation to Perform a Service for the Employer.
 (1) Where this exception is claimed, the official superior should be requested to submit a statement showing:
 (a) The precise duty the employee had performed or was expected to perform for the employer during the trip in question; and
 (b) Whether this was being done upon directions of the employer and, if not, whether the employer had prior knowledge of and had previously approved the employee's activity.
 (2) In disability cases the injured employee should be requested to submit a similar statement.
 f. Travel During a Curfew.
 (1) When it has been determined that the employee was required to travel during a curfew established by local, municipal, county or state authorities because of civil disturbances or for other reasons, the official superior should be requested to submit:
 (a) The reason the employee was requested to report for duty;
 (b) Whether other employees were given administrative leave because of the curfew; and
 (c) Whether the injury resulted from a specific hazard caused by the imposition of the curfew, such as an attack by rioting citizens.
 (2) In disability cases the injured employee should be requested to submit a similar statement.
 (3) When all the facts are developed, the case should be referred to the National Office.