2 General Principles and Legality Checking
3.2.1 Objective of Article 3
An important objective of the Regulations in Article 3 is to enable cars to race closely, by
ensuring that the aerodynamic performance loss of a car following another car is kept to a
minimum. In order to verify whether this objective has been achieved, Competitors may be
required on request to supply the FIA with any relevant information.
2024 Formula 1 Technical Regulations 13 25 April 2023
© 2023 Fédération Internationale de l’Automobile Issue 1
In any case the Intellectual Property of this information, will remain the property of the
Competitor, will be protected and not divulged to any third party.
3.2.2 Aerodynamic Influence
With the exception of the driver adjustable bodywork described in Article 3.10.10 (in addition
to minimal parts solely associated with its actuation) and the flexible seals specifically
permitted by Articles 3.13 and 3.14.4, all aerodynamic components or bodywork influencing
the car’s aerodynamic performance must be rigidly secured and immobile with respect to
their frame of reference defined in Article 3.3. Furthermore, these components must produce
a uniform, solid, hard, continuous, impervious surface under all circumstances.
Any device or construction that is designed to bridge the gap between the sprung part of the
car and the ground is prohibited under all circumstances.
With the exception of the parts necessary for the adjustment described in Article 3.10.10, or
any incidental movement due to the steering system, any car system, device or procedure
which uses driver movement as a means of altering the aerodynamic characteristics of the
car is prohibited.
The Aerodynamic influence of any component of the car not considered to be bodywork must
be incidental to its main function. Any design which aims to maximise such an aerodynamic
influence is prohibited.
3.2.3 Symmetry
All bodywork must be nominally symmetrical with respect to Y=0. Consequently, and unless
otherwise specified, any regulation in Article 3 concerning one side of the car will be assumed
to be valid for the other side of the car and references to maximum permissible numbers of
components in Article 3 will also refer to the one side of the car.
Minimal exceptions to the requirement of symmetry of this Article will be accepted for the
installation of non-symmetrical mechanical components of the car, for asymmetrical cooling
requirements or for asymmetrical angle adjustment of the front flap defined in Article 3.9.7.
Bodywork on the unsprung mass must respect this Article when the suspension position of
each wheel is virtually re-orientated so that its wheel coordinate system axes (described in
Article 2.11.3) are parallel to their respective axis of the car coordinate system (described in
Article 2.11.1).
3.2.4 Digital legality checking
The assessment of the car’s compliance with the Aerodynamic Regulations will be carried out
digitally using CAD models provided by the teams. In these models:
a. Components may only be designed to the edge of a Reference Volume or with a precise
geometrical feature, or to the limit of a geometrical criterion (save for the normal
round-off discrepancies of the CAD system), when the regulations specifically require an
aspect of the bodywork to be designed to this limit, or it can be demonstrated that the
design does not rely on lying exactly on this limit to conform to the regulations, such
that it is possible for the physical bodywork to comply.
b. Components which must follow a precise shape, surface or plane must be designed
without any tolerance, save for the normal round-off discrepancies of the CAD system.
3.2.5 Physical legality checking
The cars may be measured during a Competition in order to check their conformance to the
CAD models discussed in Article 3.2.4 and to ensure they remain inside the Reference
Volumes.
a. Unless otherwise specified, a tolerance of ±3mm will be accepted for manufacturing
purposes only with respect to the CAD surfaces. Where measured surfaces lie outside of
this tolerance but remain within the Reference Volumes, a Competitor may be required
to provide additional information (e.g. revised CAD geometry) to demonstrate
compliance with the regulations. Any discrepancies contrived to create a special
aerodynamic effect or surface finish will not be permitted.
2024 Formula 1 Technical Regulations 14 25 April 2023
© 2023 Fédération Internationale de l’Automobile Issue 1
b. Irrespective of a), geometrical discrepancies at the limits of the Reference Volumes
must be such that the measured component remains inside the Reference Volume.
c. A positional tolerance of +/- 2mm will be accepted for the Front Wing Bodywork, Rear
Wing Bodywork, Exhaust Tailpipe, Floor Bodywork behind XR=0, and Tail. This will be
assessed by realigning each of the groups of Reference Volumes and Reference Surfaces
that define the assemblies, by up to 2mm from their original position, to best fit the
measured geometry.
d. Irrespective of b), a tolerance of Z=+/-2mm will be accepted for parts of the car lying on
the Z=0 plane, with -375 ≤ Y ≤ 375 and ahead of XR=0.
e. Minimal discrepancies from the CAD surfaces will also be accepted in the following
cases:
i. Minimal repairs carried out on aerodynamic components and approved by the FIA
ii. Tape, provided it does not achieve an aerodynamic effect otherwise not
permitted by Article 3
iii. Junctions between bodywork panels
iv. Local bodywork fixing details
3.2.6 Datum Points
All cars must be equipped with mountings for optical targets that enable the car’s datum to
be determined for scrutineering in the following locations:
i. One on the forward part of the top of the survival cell.
ii. Two positioned symmetrically about Y=0 on the top of the survival cell close to XB=0.
iii. Two positioned symmetrically about Y=0 on the side of the survival cell close to XB=0.
iv. Two positioned symmetrically about Y=0 on the side of the survival cell close to the rear
mounts of the secondary roll structure.
v. Two positioned symmetrically about Y=0 within an axis-aligned cuboid with an interior
diagonal defined by points [XC=0, 175, 970] and [XC=150, -175, 870].
vi. One probed point on the RIS or gearbox case.
In all cases, a file with required datum points must be supplied for each survival cell.
For deflection testing, all cars must be provided with a means of mounting a reference
artefact to the RIS. This mounting may be temporary, but must be rigid with respect to the
underlying car structure.
Full details of the requirements are given in the Appendix the Technical and Sporting
Regulations.
3.2.7 Section titles and Article titles within this article have no regulatory value.
3.2.8 Static pressure tappings are permitted in surfaces, provided that they;
i. Have an internal diameter of no more than 2mm.
ii. They are flush with the underlying geometry.
iii. Are only connected to pressure sensors, or are blanked, without leakage.
3.3.1 Bodywork which is part of the sprung mass of the car
The only sprung mass bodywork permitted is that defined under Articles 3.5 to 3.12 and
under Articles 3.1.1.a.ii to iv. The frame of reference for every part of the car classified as
Sprung Mass Bodywork is the coordinate system defined in Article 2.11.1.
Any bodywork that is trimmed or filleted in Article 3.11 must first be declared as belonging to
one of the groups defined in Articles 3.5 to 3.10.
Unless otherwise stated, the compliance of an individual bodywork group to Article 3 will be
assessed independently and prior to any trimming, filleting and assembly operation referred
to in Article 3.11, and the FIA may request to see any discarded geometry after final
assembly. Once the final assembly is completed, any bodywork surfaces no longer exposed
to an external airstream or internal duct may be modified, providing they remain unexposed.
3.3.2 Wheel Bodywork
The only wheel bodywork permitted is that defined under Article 3.13. With the exception of
wheel covers, as defined in Article 3.13.7, the frame of reference for every part of the car
classified as Wheel Bodywork is the corresponding upright structure and the corresponding
coordinate system defined in Article 2.11.3.
The frame of reference for any wheel cover, as defined in Article 3.13.7 is the corresponding
wheel rim.
3.3.3 Suspension Fairings
The only suspension fairings permitted are those defined under Article 3.14. In order to
assess compliance with Article 3.2.2, the frame of reference of any suspension fairing is the
structural suspension member that it is attached to.