Fiber-optic communications was born at a time whenthe telecommunications industry had grown cautious and conservative after making telephone service ubiquitous in the United States and widely available in other developed countries. The backbones of the long distance telephone network were chains of microwave relay towers, which engineers had planned to replace by buried pipelines carrying millimeter waves in the 60-GHz range, starting in the 1970s. Bell Telephone Laboratories were quick to begin research on optical communications after the invention of the laser, but they spent the 1960s studying beam transmission through buried hollow confocal waveguides, expecting laser communications to be the next generation after the millimeter waveguide, on a technology timetable spanning decades. Corning’s invention of the low-loss fiber in 1970 changed all that. Bell abandoned the hollow optical guide in 1972 and never put any millimeter waveguide into commercial service after completing a field test in the mid-1970s. But telephone engineers remained wary of installing fiber without exhaustive tests and field trials. Bell engineers developed and exhaustively tested the first generation of fiber-optic systems, based on multimode graded-index fibers transmitting 45 Mb/s at 850 nm over spans of 10 km, connecting local telephone central offices. Deployment began slowly in the late 1970s, and soon a second fiber window opened at 1300nm, allowing a doubling of speed and transmission distance. In 1980, AT&T announced plans to extend multimode fiber into its long-haul network, by laying a 144-fiber cable between Boston and Washington with repeaters spaced every 7 km along an existing right of way. Yet by then change was accelerating in the no-longer stodgy telecommunications industry. Two crucial choices in system design and the breakup of AT&T were about to launch the modern fiber-optic communications industry. In 1980, Bell Labs announced that the next generation of transoceanic telephone cables would use single-mode fiber instead of the copper coaxial cables used since the first transatlantic phone cable in 1956. In 1982, the upstart MCI Communications picked single-mode fiber as the backbone of its new North American longdistance phone network, replacing the microwave towers that gave the company its original name, Microwave Communications Inc. That same year, AT&T agreed to divest its seven regional telephone companies to focus on long-distance service, computing, and communications hardware. The submarine fiber decision was a bold bet on a new technology based on desperation. Regulators had barred AT&T from operating communication satellites since the mid-1960s. Coax had reached its practical limit for intercontinental cables. Only single-mode fiber transmitting at 1310 nm could transmit 280 Mb/s through 50-km spans stretching more than 6000 km across the Atlantic. AT&T and its partners British Telecom and France Telecom set a target of 1988 for installing TAT-8, the first transatlantic fiber cable. More submarine fiber cables would follow. In 1982, MCI went looking for new technology to upgrade its long-distance phone network. Visits to British Telecom Research Labs and Japanese equipment makers convinced them that single-mode fiber transmitting 400 Mb/s at 1310 nm was ready for installation. AT&T and Sprint soon followed, with Sprint ads promoting the new fiber technology by claiming that callers could hear a pin drop over it. Fueled by the breakup of AT&T and intense competition for long-distance telephone service, fiber sales boomed as new long-haul networks were installed, then slumped briefly after their completion. The switch to single-mode fiber opened the room to further system improvements. By 1987, terrestrial long-distance backbone systems were carrying 800 Mb/s, and systems able to transmit 1.7 Gb/s were in development. Long-distance traffic increased as competition reduced long-distance rates, and developers pushed for the next transmission milestone of 2.5 Gb/s. Telecommunications was becoming an important part of the laser and optics market, pushing development of products including diode lasers, receivers, and optical connectors. Fiber optics had shifted the telephone industry into overdrive. Two more technological revolutions in their early stages in the late 1980s would soon shift telecommunications to warp speed. One came from the optical world, the fiber amplifier. The other came from telecommunications—the Internet. Even inthe late 1980s, the bulk of telecommunications traffic consisted of telephone conversations. (Cable television networks carried analog signals and were separate from the usual world of telecommunications.) Telephony was a mature industry, with traffic volume growing about 10% a year. Fiber traffic was increasing faster than that because fiber was displacing older technologies including microwave relays and geosynchronous communication satellites. Telecommunications networks also carried some digital data, but the overall volume was small. The ideas that laid the groundwork for the Internet date back to the late 1960s. Universities began installing terminals so students and faculty could access mainframe computers, ARPANET began operations to connect universities, and telephone companies envisioned linking home users to mainframes through telephone wiring. Special terminals were hooked to television screens for early home information services called videotex. But those data services attracted few customers, and data traffic remained limited until the spread of personal computers in the 1980s. The first personal computer modems sent 300 bits/s through phone lines, a number that soon rose to 1200 bits/s. Initially the Internet was limited to academic and government users, so other PC users accessed private networks such as CompuServe and America Online, but private Internet accounts became available by 1990. The World Wide Web was launched in 1991 at the European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN)and initially grew slowly. Butin 1994the numberofserverssoaredfrom500 to 10,000, and the data floodgates were loosed. Digital traffic soared. By good fortune, the global fiber-optic backbone network was already in place as data traffic started to soar. Construction expenses are a major part of network costs, so multi-fiber cables were laid that in the mid-1980s were thought to be adequate to support many years of normal traffic growth. That kept the “Information Superhighway” from becoming a global traffic jam as data traffic took off. The impact of fiber is evident in Fig. 1, a chart presented by Donald Keck during his 2011 CLEO plenary talk. Diverse new technologies had increased data transmission rates since 1850. Fiber optics became the dominant technology after 1980 and is responsible for the change in slope of the data-rate growth. Even morefortunately, Internet traffic was growing in phase with the development of a vital new optical technology, the optical fiber amplifier. Early efforts to develop all-optical amplifiers focused on semiconductor sources, because they could be easily matched to signal wavelengths, but experiments in the middle to late 1980s found high noise levels. Attention turned to fiber amplifiers after David Payne demonstrated the first erbium-doped fiber amplifier in 1987. (See Digonnet’s chapter on p. 195.) Elias Snitzer had demonstrated a neodymium-doped optical amplifier at American Optical in 1964, but it had not caught on because it required flashlamp pumping. Erbium was the right material at the right time. Its gain band fell in the 1550-nm window where optical fibers have minimum attenuation. Within a couple of years, British Telecom Labs had identified a diode-laser pump band at 980 nm and Snitzer, then at Polaroid, had found another at 1480 nm. By 1989, diode-pumped fiber amplifiers looked like good replacements for cumbersome electro-optic repeaters. What launched the bandwidth revolution was the ability of fiber amplifiers to handle wavelength division multiplexed signals. The first tests started with only a few wavelengths and a single amplifier; then developers added more wavelengths and additional amplifiers. The good news was that wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) multiplied capacity by the number of channels that could be squeezed into the transmission band. The bad news was that WDM also multiplied the number of potential complications.