Design and Analysis of a 170 GHz Antenna for Millimeter-wave
 Applications
 

 ABSTRACT:
 Microstrip patch antennas are low-profile and robust when mounted on rigid surfaces of
 the devices making them suitable for communication and millimeter-wave applications. In
 this paper, an antenna is designed for the resonant frequency of 170 GHz using microstrip
 technology concerning its miniaturization and cost-effectiveness. The designed antenna is a
 part of a stray radiation detection system for ECE diagnostic to be installed on fusion
 research machine ITER. It offers low-directivity to receive radiation from all directions, high
 bandwidth, low side-lobe-level and return loss of -50 dB, leading to its remarkable utilization
 in the detection system being designed to protect millimeter wave components of ITER ECE
 Diagnostic. Power-handling and power-capturing capability of the designed antenna have
 also been discussed in the paper. Far-field simulations have been performed using CST
 Microwave Studio software to study the radiation characteristics of the designed antenna.
 

 V. RESULTS
 Impedance matching always ensures the maximum power transfer between the source and the
 load. Hence, a noble matching circuit is required for a specific design ensuring its better
 performance. The corporate feed network can use either a quarter-wave transformer or a stub to
 match patch element impedance to standard 50-ohm input impedance. The preferences mentioned
 above for our design are configured in Fig. 3. The important properties of the designed system
 with both configurations are simulated using CST Microwave Studio software and examined
 below to check their reliability.
 

 A. S-Parameter and VSWR
 The amount of power reflected from the antenna is parametrized by 𝑆11 parameter and Voltage
 Standing Wave Ratio (VSWR) related to each other by the following relation
 𝑆11 = 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝑑𝐵) = -20 log10 (
 𝑉𝑆𝑊𝑅 - 1
 𝑉𝑆𝑊𝑅 + 1
 ) 
 The antenna bandwidth can also be measured from the VSWR plot over a range of frequencies
 where its value is ≤ 2. The variation of 𝑆11 over the range of frequencies for quarter-wave
 transformer and stub configuration is plotted in Fig. 4. At the resonant frequency, i.e., 170 GHz ,
 the minimum value of 𝑆11 is -50 𝑑𝐵 for quarter-wave and -35 𝑑𝐵 for stub configuration. It
 articulates the impedance matching along the propagation path of the signal and effective power
 delivery for quarter-wave transformer configuration.
 B. Side Lobe Level and Beamwidth
 The performance of an antenna is usually measured in terms of gain and its relative 3D radiation
 pattern. The radiation pattern is represented by polar plots as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), measured
 in the far-field antenna range as mentioned earlier. It suggests that the main lobe direction is
 different for both the quarter-wave transformer and the stub configuration for the resonant
 frequency 170 GHz, which is 260
 and 7
 0
 , respectively. However, they possess approximately the
 same magnitude of gain depicted in Fig. 5(c) and (d). Gain IEEE measured in both configurations
 does not include the losses associated with the polarization and impedance mismatching. 
 Far-field characteristics also enable us to investigate two important parameters associated with
 antenna performance. One is Half-Power beamwidth (also known as angular width), defined as the
 angular separation of 3dB in the radiation pattern. It deals with the resolution capabilities of the
 system. And another is the Side-lobe level (SLL), measured by the ratio of the amplitude of the
 main lobe to that of the side lobe. Low SLL minimizes the false target indication through the side
 lobes. There is a trade-off between both parameters and one needs to be compromised over the
 other [21]. We designed a system with a wider reception angle in lieu of high SLL to meet our
 requirements.
 The major difference in both the configuration, i.e., stub and quarter-wave transformer, can be
 noted in Fig. 5. In the case of stub configuration, the value of angular width and SLL parameter are 31.5
 0
 and -3.6𝑑𝐵, respectively. However, for quarter-wave transformer these are 70.5
 0
 and
 -15.5𝑑𝐵. It is evident from here that the parameters such as bandwidth, gain, S-parameter and
 side-lobe level attain desirable values for antenna array with quarter-wave transformer as a
 matching circuit. In other words, the quarter-wave transformer dominates over the stub in terms of
 better impedance matching, which makes it suitable for our desired application.
 C. Efficiency
 The power supplied to the system generally dispenses into surface-wave excitation, radiation
 emission and conductor and dielectric dissipation. Radiation efficiency is defined as the ratio of
 power radiated to the power inserted into the antenna system which is plotted in Fig. 6 for the
 2 × 2 antenna array. It also encompasses the total efficiency of the system that takes into account
 all 𝐼
 2𝑅 losses and the reflections arise due to mismatching between the antenna and the
 transmission line. 
 

 For better understanding, we summarized the above-discussed properties of the individual
 patch antenna and the antenna array (with two different matching circuit configurations) in tabular
 form in Table 2. Here, we conclude the superiority of the 2×2 antenna array with a quarter-wave 
 14
 transformer over other systems in terms of return loss, bandwidth, efficiency, angular width and
 SLL.
 

 VI. CONCLUSION
 A 2 × 2 microstrip antenna array has been designed and simulated successfully for the resonant
 frequency of 170 GHz using CST Microwave Studio software. The dominance of the antenna array
 over the individual patch has been proved while investigating their properties and power handling
 capabilities. However, continuous increment in the number of patches of an antenna array
 enhances its directivity further and decreases its angular width. Hence, the 2 × 2 antenna
 geometry reasonably satisfies our desired requirements. Significant properties of the designed
 system such as S-parameter, VSWR, gain, beamwidth, side-lobe level, efficiency have been
 estimated and discussed. A comparative study of the two matching circuits, i.e., stub and quarterwave transformer, have also been performed. The designed system's power-handling capability is
 also evaluated to check its reliability. At resonant frequency 170 GHz, the return loss is -50 dB,
 angular width is 70.5
 0
 and the gain is 8.6dBi for the designed antenna. The simulation results show that the designed system fulfills required characteristics and is recommended for high-frequency
 detector applications.
 The future work is to design a detector system for application in ECE diagnostic components
 protection, utilizing this designed antenna.