**Small Business Startup/Management Guide**

The Strongsville Business Startup & Management Guide
 Section Page #
Small Business Readiness Assessment Tool……1
Small Business Planning Resources………...….2
State & County Financing Programs..………….3
 Opportunities Within the City of Strongsville….4
Northeast Ohio Technology Incubators………...5
Workforce Development & Export Assistance…6
 Additional Resources…………………………...7
 Contact Information…………………...………..8
Entrepreneurship and small business development are critical to the sustainability of any
community and the City of Strongsville is committed to helping local business men and women
succeed through the challenge of starting and maintaining a small business. This document is
designed to be a start-up guide rich with resources to help you on your journey to business
ownership. I hope you find the following information helpful and please do not hesitate to contact
me if I can be of assistance.
Brent Painter
Director of Economic Development
City of Strongsville
(440) 580-3118
brent.painter@strongsville.org
i.
Table of Contents

Small Business Readiness Assessment Tool (SBAT)
Developed by the Small Business Administration (SBA), the Small Business Readiness Assessment
Tool (SBAT) is an interactive questionnaire developed to assess an entrepreneur’s readiness to start a
business.
Questions within the SBAT are designed to evaluate the user’s skills, personal characteristics, and
experience in relation to their preparedness to start a business.
After the questionnaire is completed the results are tallied and an assessment profile is provided. The
user is also supplied a statement of “Suggested Next Steps” and links to free online courses and counseling.
To complete the Small Business Readiness Assessment Tool please select the web address below:
https://eweb1.sba.gov/cams/training/business_primer/assessment.htm
*The SBAT is an automated self-assessment tool. None of the information provided is collected, tabulated, or utilized by the SBA or any other organization.
1
Starting a small business is a risk. Studies reveal that the common causes of
business failure, in particular small business, are:
 Poor Location
 Lack of Research Regarding Market Potential
 Over Optimistic Business Plans
 Poor evaluation of Competition
 Lack of Unique Selling Proposition (USP)
 Lack of Marketing Expertise
 Conflict with Partners
 Failure to Put Forth Required Time and Effort
 Insufficient Capital to Grow the Business
 Inefficient Employees
Careful planning and the utilization of available expertise are essential to
the success of any new business. The first step within the planning process
is to assess the entrepreneur’s readiness to expend the necessary resources to
create and grow a prosperous small business.
Small Business Readiness

State of Ohio’s 1st Stop Business Connection (614) 466-4232
At the 1st Stop Business Connection website an entrepreneur will be guided through a six step process
that will help them create a free business information kit containing state-level instructions regarding
starting a business in Ohio.
The business information kit includes:
 A checklist detailing State of Ohio requirements & regulations for the specified industry
 Instructions for applying for an Employer Identification Number (EIN)
 Business name registration instructions
 Workers Compensation information
 And more
One-on-One Small Business Counseling
The Cleveland Small Business Administration (SBA) Office (216) 522-4180
The Small Business Administration is a federal government agency that was created to aid, counsel,
assist, and protect the interests of small businesses, preserve free competitive enterprise, and maintain
and strengthen the overall U.S. economy. The Cleveland SBA Office assists entrepreneurs through
training, counseling, and business development programs including loan guaranties.
For further detail on the Cleveland SBA please select the link listed below:
www.sba.gov/localresources/district/oh/cleveland/index.html
The Small Business Development Center (SBDC) of Cleveland (216) 987-2969
The Small Business Development Center of Cleveland is a division of the Ohio Department of Development whose mission is to contribute to the economic growth in the Greater Cleveland market by
providing a one-stop business information portal and hands-on education throughout the entire lifecycle of a small business.
To learn more about the Cleveland SBDC and schedule an appointment for free counseling please
visit the link listed below:
www.entrepreneurohio.org/center.aspx?center=17087&subloc=1
2
 Small Business Planning Resources
 3
JobsOhio (614) 224-6446
JobsOhio offers a wide range of financing options for companies looking to start, relocate, and
expand within Ohio.
 To learn more about JobsOhio and State Incentive Programs please select the link listed below:
https://www.jobsohio.com/
State of Ohio: Treasurer’s Office (614) 466-2160
The Treasurer’s GrowNOW interest rate reduction program is designed to help small businesses
grow by providing them with critical cash flow. When a business is approved for a loan from one
of the hundreds of eligible banks in Ohio, GrowNOW provides an additional three percent discount on the loan’s already negotiated interest rate, when the loan is linked to creating or saving
jobs in Ohio.
 Select the link listed below to learn more regarding the Ohio Treasurer’s GrowNOW Program:
tos.ohio.gov/grownow
Cuyahoga County: Department of Development (216) 443-7260
The Cuyahoga County Department of Development offers various financing opportunities designed
to create local business growth and enhanced employment opportunities within Cuyahoga County.
Select the link listed below to learn more regarding the Cuyahoga County’s assistance programs:
http://development.cuyahogacounty.us/en-US/Economic-Development-Programs.aspx
 State & County Financing Programs
 4
Available Property Database
The City of Strongsville, Department of Economic Development, maintains an
available properties database to assist in the site selection process.
Users can research available industrial & commercial land as well as retail,
office, and industrial space within existing buildings.
To view available properties within Strongsville please select the link listed below:
www.strongsville.org/departments/economic-development/available-properties
Tax Incentives
The City of Strongsville has various tax incentive programs designed to benefit businesses who are
relocating to Strongsville and expanding within the region.
To review available tax incentives and eligibility requirements please select the link listed below:
www.strongsville.org/departments/economic-development/tax-incentives
The Strongsville Corporate Relocation Guide & Community Profile
The Strongsville Corporate Relocation Guide & Community Profile describes the pro-business environment within the city and provides site selectors with the information most often requested.
To download the Strongsville Corporate Relocation Guide select the link listed below:
www.strongsville.org/departments/economic-development
Demographics & Site Selector Resources
Located on www.strongsville.org, the Demographics & Site Selectors Resources webpage provides information regarding demographic data, business & workforce reports, and specifics regarding the City
of Strongsville, including distance to major markets, largest employers, and city traffic counts.
To learn more select the link below:
www.strongsville.org/departments/economic-development/community-profile
*To relocate your business to Strongsville contact Brent Painter, Director of Economic Development, at (440) 580-3118 or at brent.painter@strongsville.org
www.strongsville.org
The City of Strongsville
 5
Manufacturing Advocacy & Growth Network (MAGNET)
www.magnetwork.org
1768 East 25th Street
Cleveland, Ohio 44114
(216) 432-4197
Great Lakes Incubator for Developing Enterprises (GLIDE)
www.glideit.org
151 Innovation Drive, Suite 210 (Located at Lorain County Community College)
Elyria, Ohio 44035
(440) 366-4310
Braintree Partners
www.braintreepartners.org
201 East Fifth Street, Suite 100
Mansfield, Ohio 44901
(419) 525-1614
The Akron Global Business Accelerator
www.akronaccelerator.com
526 South Main Street
Akron, Ohio 44311
(330) 375-2173
Youngstown Business Incubator (YBI)
www.ybi.org
241 Federal Plaza West
Youngstown, Ohio 44503
(330) 746-5003
Jumpstart, Inc.
www.jumpstartinc.org
737 Bolivar Road, Suite 3000
Cleveland, Ohio 44115
(216) 363-3400
The Northeast Ohio Edison Technology Incubator Program is designed to assist technology-oriented
start-ups during their concept definition & development stages. A list of local incubators can be
found below.
 Northeast Ohio’s Incubators
 6
Export Assistance
U.S. Export Assistance Cleveland Office
The Cleveland U.S. Export Assistance Center (USEAC) is a division of the U.S. Depart of Commerce
and provide comprehensive solutions to international trade challenges through expert counseling.
To review the services and programs provided by the USEAC please visit the website listed below:
www.export.gov/ohio/northernohio/
International Trade Assistance Center
The International Trade Assistance Center (ITAC) provides export assistance services to small and
medium sized businesses in order to promote growth through exports.
To learn more about ITAC select the link listed below:
www.csuohio.edu/business/global/international-trade-assistance-center
Ohio Development Services Agency: Global Markets Division
With 7 international offices, the Ohio Development Services Agency’s Global Markets Division’s goal
is to develop new relationships in foreign countries that will benefit the export strategies of Ohio’s
businesses.
Select the link listed below to learn more about the Global Markets Division:
http://development.ohio.gov/bs/bs_globalohio.htm
Workforce Development
OhioMeansJobs
OhioMeansJobs is a collaborative workforce system within Cuyahoga County that helps local
employers meet their human capital needs and assists job seekers in finding success.
To learn more about OhioMeansJobs please select the link below:
www.ohiomeansjobs.com
Cuyahoga Community College Corporate College
Cuyahoga Community College offers Northeast Ohio companies affordable, cutting-edge training
programs that can be custom-designed to accommodate an employers workforce development needs
through the Corporate College.
To learn more about the Corporate College please select the link listed below:
www.corporatecollege.com
Polaris Career Center
The Polaris Career Center Adult Education Department offers comprehensive education and training
services.
For more details please click the link listed below:
www.polaris.edu/adult-education/
 Workforce Development & Export Assistance
