ADVERSE POSSESSION
 

 By: George Coppolo, Chief Attorney
 SUMMARY
 Connecticut law recognizes adverse possession as a way to acquire title to property. Adverse possession is a method of acquiring title to real estate, accomplished by an open, visible, and exclusive possession uninterruptedly for a 15-year period (CGS § 52-575; Whitney v. Turmel 180 Conn. 147 (1980)). Connecticut also recognizes the right to acquire a right-of-way or other easement by continuous, uninterrupted use of someone else's land for 15 years (CGS § 47-37).
 The legislature has amended this law three times during the past 10 years- in 1996, 1999, and 2002.
 Legislation passed in 1996 authorizes a landowner who wishes to interrupt an adverse possession claim, in addition to things already required, to serve a notice on the adverse possessor and record it on the land records (PA 96-249). Such service and notice is an interruption of the use and possession and prevents the acquisition of a right by continuing the use and possession thereafter.
 Legislation adopted in 1999 protects land belonging to a nonprofit land-holding organization from adverse possession. The act applies to non-stock corporations whose principal purposes include the conservation and preservation of land (PA 99-64).
 PA 02-66 prohibits adverse possession claims on certain types of land owned by investor-owned water companies.
 The law in other states is similar to Connecticut's. The main difference is that some jurisdictions have established a shorter or longer period, and some have established different time periods for different types of property.
 CONNECTICUT
 Adverse possession can create an absolute title to real estate, which is as good as title by deed from the record owner. But adverse possession as record title requires evidence showing the existence of all elements necessary for adverse possession, and apparently this can be done only in a judicial proceeding to which those to be bound by the decision have been made parties.
 The essential elements of an adverse possession sufficient to create title to land in a claimant are that the owner is ousted of possession and kept out uninterruptedly for 15 years by an open, visible, and exclusive possession by the claimant, under a claim of right, with the intention of using the property as his own, and without the owner's consent. The possession must be hostile and under a claim of right, actual, open, notorious, exclusive, continuous, and uninterrupted (Goodman v. Quadrato, 142 Conn. 398 (1954)).
 The 15-year period comes from CGS § 52-575 which establishes this time frame for an owner to assert his ownership claim over an adverse possessor.
 A landowner who wishes to interrupt an adverse possession claim may serve a notice on the adverse possessor and record it on the land records. Such service and notice is an interruption of the use and possession and prevents the acquisition of a right by continuing the use and possession thereafter.
 The notice must be served on the adverse possessor, his agent, or guardian if they are in Connecticut, in the same way lawsuit papers are served. Otherwise, a copy of the notice must be affixed to the house on the land in question or to some other conspicuous part of the premises.
 The notice and papers indicating the notice was served must be recorded in the land records of the town where the land is located within three months after service. When the adverse possessor is unknown, the notice must be given by conspicuously posting a copy on the property, serving it on the person to whom the taxes were last assessed, and recording it on the land records.
 The law prohibits adverse possession of:
 1. certain types of land owned by investor-owned water companies (CGS § 47-27(b));
 2. land belonging to a non-profit corporation organized under Connecticut law with land conservation or preservation as one of its principal purposes (CGS § 47-27(b)); and
 3. certain railroad and canal land (CGS § 47-26).