1. Introduction
 The SARS-CoV-2 genome is constantly evolving, with mutations happening at a rate of about once every 2 weeks
 [1]. While not all mutations change the characteristics of the virus, some mutations have proven to be of greater concern.
 Variants of interest (VOI) are labelled as such when an observed lineage is shown to have mutations potentially causing
 increased transmissibility or virulence, among other attributes [2]. Health organisations may reclassify these variants as
 variants of concern (VOC) if there is a demonstrable impact on epidemiological data. These viruses are labelled by WHO
 and assigned a lineage based on PANGO nomenclature [3].
 Wastewater surveillance has emerged as a crucial tool in tracking mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 genome.
 Samples of untreated wastewater can be collected to provide useful information about the spread of COVID-19 in the
 community, without relying on clinical testing [4,5]. As clinical sampling mainly relies on symptomatic testing,
 wastewater sampling can provide unbiased and consistent data which can be used to inform appropriate public health
 responses. It is used to detect variants earlier and provide more context on the transmissibility and COVID-19 levels in
 communities, particularly where access to clinical testing is not readily available. As wastewater samples consist of a
 mixture of fragmented RNA from many sources, it can be difficult to accurately identify mutations and variants,
 particularly those without a known lineage [6].
 Next-generation sequencing has proven to be an important tool in pandemic surveillance, particularly in the
 early detection and spread of variants [7-9]. With a high rate of occurrence of mutations and increased transmissibility,
 the need to provide high throughput data generation in a relatively short time frame has led to the development of a
 number of tools and protocols using next-generation sequencing, such as SARS-CoV-2 specific primers and tools to
 determine lineage in samples. These sequencing methods have been useful in analysing clinical and environmental
 samples, assisting in tracking viral load, transmission, contact tracing, and virus evolution [8]. Illumina and Nanopore
 sequencing are two next-generation sequencing technologies that have become major tools in genomic research.
 Illumina sequencing is a second-generation sequencing technology that uses sequencing by synthesis (SBS), where a
 reversible fluorescent terminator is used to detect the nucleotide sequence [10,11]. Nanopore sequencing is a thirdgeneration sequencing technology that uses the current changes in a charged protein nanopore from the molecule
 passing through to determine the specific sequence [10,12]. Multiple studies have been done on the comparison of
 Nanopore and Illumina sequencing, highlighting their various advantages in different applications [13-15]. Illumina
 sequencing is widely regarded as being highly accurate, consistently sequencing around 99.5-99.9% accuracy, and the
 higher depth of reads enables it to be a useful tool in circumstances with poor sequencing coverage, such as wastewater
 surveillance [16]. Nanopore sequencing has the ability to produce ultra-long reads, only limited by the sample
 preparation and quality, and is useful in genomic assembly and spanning entire regions of repetitive bases and structural
 variation [17]. Furthermore, real-time analysis of sequences and portability of sequencing devices has benefits in the
 field. Studies have been completed comparing Illumina and Nanopore sequencing on clinical and wastewater SARSCoV-2 samples, which focuses on benchmarking parameters such as genome coverage and depth and variant calling on
 samples. However, they did not explore the combination of the two sequencing technologies as a method to improve
 detection of variants [18-20].
 In this work, we look to highlight the advantages of both Illumina and Nanopore sequencing in tracking SARSCoV-2 variants from wastewater samples. Mutational analysis on samples sequenced with both methods allows for a
 comparison of major variants identified among each dataset.