Dependable Mic
I do sound for small bands and these mics are very dependable and sound great. The work for vocals and instruments. A good buy.
by Aj from Salinas, Ca on November 29, 2023
Music background: Dj/Live Sound


Best Dynamic Mic ever
This mix is amazing. It will always be a classic. Still putting it through its paces but it sounds great.
by VenoMUZIK from Columbus, OH on August 10, 2023
Music background: Singer/songwriter, composer, producer


Great sounding mic for the money
Have been impressed with the pickup and sound quality of these mics compared to some of the other mics I use
by Lee Yoritomo from Montgomery Village, MD on February 16, 2024


Shure SM 58 Microphone..
No matter what type of venue you do you're SM 58 microphone is always ready to go no batteries to change out and it's always spot on!
by Sweetwater Customer from Alaska on February 6, 2024


Shure SM 58 Microphone..
No matter what type of venue you do you're SM 58 microphone is always ready to go no batteries to change out and it's always spot on!
by Sweetwater Customer from Kenai, Alaska on February 6, 2024


Twenty years ago I quickly acquired a Realistic microphone to use when I served as the disc jockey at wedding receptions and class reunions. When it recently rolled off the table at an event and broke into a few pieces I wanted to order a replacement. I purchased the Shure SM 58 Handheld Dynamic Vocal Microphone (based on a co-worker's recommendation).


When a microphone was needed at a recent festival I gave it the first testing. It was much lower and less powerful than my previous "cheaper" microphone (which had been purchased at a local Radio Shack affiliate). I am currently involved with testing it at my workplace to see if it is truly defective or needs some sort of power boost to effectively broadcast voices loud enough through my gear.


parts not interchangeable
By daniel graves from California on May 10, 2017 Music Background: performer
Many reviews will tell you that the sms58S is just the sm58 with a switch added. But when trying to exchange the microphone element between the two, I discovered that the parts are not interchangeable. The thread count is different on the collar and different on the mike head, with different rubber gaskets, the diameter of the mike elements are different, and wiring colors are different. Possibly this is a difference in year of manufacture, One mike is a year old, the other unknown but at least 5yrs old (these mikes have been around since the 60's, so who knows). One other difference is that the SMS58 is more insulated,and less prone to noise from handling the mike (or did they just make the the housing quieter in the older models?


Shure SM58
By Timothy Connelly from Pacifin North West on December 22, 2023 Music Background: Garage band, Open Mic, Gigs
The mic works well, however I wish it had a on/off switch'
On another matter, I was hoping to review the purchase of my JBL EONONE 1 Perhaps it is my age (72), but I find it very confusing in regards to the operation of the unit. I realize Sweetwater is not the manufacturer of the JBL EONONE, however it would be great if Sweetwater could produce an owners manual that a senior citizen could understand. I have managed to program 2 out of 5 channels. I have not solved all of the special affects including reverb, chorus and delay, Maybe for a younger consumer who is better educated in the "tech" world , this is not a problem. I can promise you for this consumer, it is more than frustrating.

Sincerely
Timothy Connelly