Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences∗

                             Robert E. Hall
            Hoover Institution and Department of Economics,
                           Stanford University
                National Bureau of Economic Research

          World interest rates have been declining for several decades.
      In a general equilibrium setting, the interest rate is determined
      by the interaction of a number of types of behavior: the policy
      of the central bank, investment in productive assets, the choice
      between current and future consumption, and the responses of
      wealth holders to risk. Central banks devote consider eﬀort
      to determining equilibrium real rates, around which they set
      their policy rates, though measuring the equilibrium rate is
      challenging. The real interest rate is also connected to the
      marginal product of capital, though the connection is loose.
      Similarly, the real interest rate is connected to consumption
      growth through a Euler equation, but again many other inﬂu-
      ences enter the relationship between the two variables. Finally,
      the idea of the “global saving glut” suggests that the rise of
      income in countries with high propensities to save may be a
      factor in the decline in real rates. That idea receives support in
      a simple model of global ﬁnancial equilibrium between coun-
      tries with risk tolerance (the United States) and ones with high
      risk aversion (China).
      JEL Codes: E21, E22, E43, E52.



    Low world interest rates have stimulated new interest in the
determination of the safe real rate. As a threshold matter, Rachel
and Smith’s ﬁgure 1 (this issue) and Juselius et al.’s ﬁgure 1 (this
issue) document the pronounced downward trend of world real inter-
est rates since the 1980s. For the purposes of this commentary, I take

   ∗
     This research was supported by the Hoover Institution. Complete backup
for all of the calculations is available from my website, http://www.stanford.
edu/∼rehall. Author contact: rehall@stanford.edu; stanford.edu/∼rehall.



                                     103
104        International Journal of Central Banking   September 2017


the real rate to be the yield net of inﬂation of safe government debt
of maturity around one to two years. Thus I abstract from liquidity
eﬀects at the short end of the yield curve and from issues related to
the slope of the yield curve.
    Structural relations governing the real interest rate include its
relation to

      • the central bank’s payment on reserves and the extent of sat-
        uration of the ﬁnancial system in reserves
      • the marginal product of capital
      • the rate of consumption growth (through the Euler equation)
      • the terms of trade between risk-tolerant and risk-averse
        investors

    In a complete macro model one or more equations would describe
each of these structural relations. It would not be possible to divide
up responsibility among them for the overall decline in the real rate.
One can fashion a set of highly simpliﬁed models, each containing
only one or two of the structural relations. For example, Krugman
(1998) considers an economy with no capital and no uncertainty to
focus on monetary policy and consumption growth and illuminate
issues of the zero lower bound. But a set of models along those lines
would not result in an additive breakdown of the sources of the
decline in the real interest rate.


1.    Monetary Policy and the Real Interest Rate

Traditional monetary policy kept the interest paid on reserves at zero
nominal and manipulated the quantity of reserves. Explaining how
the central bank inﬂuenced interest rates involved consideration of
the liquidity value of scarce reserves. Today, all major central banks
have saturated their ﬁnancial systems with reserves, so the liquid-
ity value is zero, and the central banks execute monetary policy
exclusively by manipulation of the payment made to reserve hold-
ers (in the United States, a new kind of reserves, reverse repurchase
agreements, play this role).
    Powerful forces of arbitrage link the central bank’s policy rate
paid on reserves to similar short-term government obligations. The
Vol. 13 No. 3     Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences       105


central bank thus controls short rates directly. But the fact of central
bank control does not mean that we need look no further to under-
stand the movements of short rates. For one thing, it is the behavior
of real rates that matters and all central banks set nominal rates,
though there would be no obstacle to direct setting of real rates. Hall
and Reis (2016) discusses these topics in detail. Thus the behavior
of inﬂation needs to be brought into the picture. More important,
however, is that changing the policy rate has eﬀects on output and
employment relatively quickly and on inﬂation, with a longer lag,
according to most views.
    As a result of the inﬂuence of the central bank’s policy rate on
the other key macro variables, the other structural relations listed
above come into play in the central bank’s choice of the policy rate.
Only the most naive observer thinks that the central bank can pick
its policy rate by unilateral whim. Friedman (1968), following Wick-
sell, set forth a framework that remains inﬂuential ﬁfty years later:
There is a level of the real interest rate, r∗ , the natural rate, with
the property that it is infeasible for the central bank to run a mon-
etary policy that results in a real rate permanently above or below
the natural rate. Thus many discussions of the behavior of the real
rate focus on quantifying r∗ , generally as a quantity that varies over
time. Since 1980, it has had a downward trend.
    The foundations of the hypothesis that rt∗ is a cognizable fea-
ture of the economy are weak, in my opinion—see Hall (2005).
It takes an economic or statistical model to extract rt∗ from data
on rt and other variables. The results are model speciﬁc. Laubach
and Williams (2003) is the canon of this literature. Notwithstand-
ing my doubts about the foundations, these authors’ results seem
completely reasonable. Juselius et al. (this issue) reﬁne the canon.
The middle of their ﬁgure 6 shows the real rate, which is volatile and
cyclical. The Laubach-Williams natural rate is a plausibly smoothed
version of the actual real rate. As Friedman’s analysis predicted, the
actual real rate exceeds its natural level in booms and falls below in
busts. The natural rate of Juselius et al. has higher volatility and,
surprisingly, a higher level. Friedman’s analysis suggested fairly per-
suasively that the real rate should deviate above about as much as
below the natural rate, but the new construction has almost all of
the deviations below.
106      International Journal of Central Banking     September 2017


      Figure 1. Spread between the Return to Capital
              and the Safe Real Interest Rate




2.    The Marginal Product of Capital and
      the Return to Capital

In an economy without uncertainty, the return to capital is linked
to the marginal product by the rental price of capital. Provided
the rental price includes the ﬂuctuations in Tobin’s q—the ratio
of the value of installed capital to the acquisition price of capital—
arbitrage should equate the marginal product of capital to the rental
price. To put it diﬀerently, if the rate of return is calculated from
data that accounts for q, the rate of return will track the inter-
est rate (measured over the same interval) period by period. With
uncertainty, the rate of return will include a risk premium, which
may vary over time. The recent macro literature has studied ﬁnan-
cial frictions that interpose between wealth holders and businesses
seeking to attract wealth to form business capital.
    Figure 1 shows the spread between the calculated return to cap-
ital and the one-year safe real interest rate, from Hall (2015). Note
that the spread is remarkably volatile, upward trending, and high
except in recessions. Gomme, Ravikumar, and Rupert (2015) have
made similar calculations. The notion that there is a tight connec-
tion between the safe interest rate and the return to capital receives
Vol. 13 No. 3    Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences      107


     Figure 2. U.S. Real Rate and Consumption Growth




little support from this evidence. Rather, there is apparently large
scope for variations over time in risk premiums, ﬁnancial frictions,
and other sources of the wedge between the earnings of capital and
the risk-free cost of borrowing. These variations are almost certainly
endogenous.

3.   Consumption Growth and the Interest Rate

Many macro models, including the New Keynesian models that have
proliferated at central banks, contain an upward-sloping structural
relation between expected consumption growth and the real interest
rate—Rachel and Smith’s equation (1) describes the Euler equation
reﬂecting this relation. The logic is that a higher real interest rate
makes future consumption cheaper than current consumption, so
households consume less currently and more in the future. To put it
another way, higher growth rates should have correspondingly higher
real interest rates. Figure 2 shows that this proposition is somewhat
true in U.S. data averaged over decades.
    The proposition encounters some serious obstacles. First, Carroll
and Summers (1991) observed that across countries that can trade
goods and ﬁnancial claims, all countries should have the same rate
of growth of consumption, in accord with the worldwide real interest
108       International Journal of Central Banking       September 2017


rate, irrespective of their rates of growth of income. Countries with
high expected income growth should borrow from slower-growing
countries and gradually pay the debt oﬀ as growth occurs. In fact,
the evidence shows that consumption growth is tightly linked to
income growth across countries. And growth rates diﬀer markedly
across countries, with the highest growth in recent decades in east
and south Asia.
    Second, a household does not have a single Euler equation, but
rather a diﬀerent one for each asset. Hansen and Singleton (1983) is
the classic citation on this point. There is nothing special about the
safe real interest rate. Their paper showed that the data rejected the
hypothesis that households satisﬁed all of the Euler equations.
    Third, data on household ﬁnancial holdings make it clear that
households with collectively an important fraction of total income
face binding constraints on borrowing. They would like to obey the
Euler-equation model but cannot commit to repaying the debt that
they would incur if they did. They obey a related model where a
shadow borrowing rate, higher than the measured one, tracks con-
sumption growth.
    I conclude that research on consumption choices has a far richer
view than the one expressed in the simple interest-only Euler
equation.

4.    The Role of the Interest Rate in an Economy where
      Risk-Tolerant Investors Insure Risk-Averse Ones by
      Borrowing from Them

Hall (2016) demonstrates the theoretical and practical importance
of trade among heterogeneous investors. In eﬀect, the risk-tolerant
investors insure the risk-averse ones. Debt has a key role in this risk-
motivated trade. By borrowing from the risk averse, the risk-tolerant
investors provide the risk averse with protection against future ran-
dom shocks, because the payoﬀ of the debt is unaﬀected by the
shocks (provided no default occurs). The interest rate on the debt
describes the terms of the risk trade. If the risk tolerant have high
resources relative to the risk averse, collectively, the risk averse com-
mand a good deal—they receive a high rate of interest on the funds
they loan to the risk tolerant. But if there is an upward trend in the
resources of the risk averse, the deal shifts disadvantageously away
Vol. 13 No. 3     Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences        109


from the risk averse—they earn less and less interest on the funds
they lend. The paper shows that China behaves risk aversely, lending
large volumes of funds to western Europe and the United States. But
the Chinese resource base—measured by GDP—is growing faster
than the resource base of the risk-tolerant borrowers. Hence the
world real interest rate is declining on account of the diﬀerential
growth.
    The model backing up this analysis is rigged to avoid the other
issues discussed earlier in this commentary. There is no central bank
intervening in the world ﬁnancial market. There is no capital, so
no issue of the relation of the marginal product of capital to the
interest rate. Resources are growing at the rate of zero among the
risk averse and the risk tolerant, so there are no issues of growth
aﬀecting the interest rate. The model embodies standard ideas from
ﬁnancial markets, including the hypothesis that investors attribute
a small but positive probability that a truly bad event will occur
and the hypothesis that the risk-averse investors place a somewhat
higher probability on that event.
    My paper pursues the ideas in Bernanke et al. (2011) that there is
a “global savings glut” and in Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot (2010)
and Caballero and Farhi (2016) that low real interest rates are the
result of a “shortage” of safe assets. The paper derives results along
those lines from the equilibrium of an Arrow-Debreu economy with
complete capital markets. In place of gluts and shortages, the model
hypothesizes changes over time in the resources held by the risk
tolerant in relation to those held by the risk averse.
    Figure 3 shows how the safe real interest rate in the model
declines as the fraction of resources held by the risk tolerant declines.
The decline is similar to the decline that actually occurred from 1990
to the present, with real rates at or below zero. The risk-tolerant
investors in the model have modestly lower coeﬃcients of relative
risk aversion and believe that the probability of bad conditions is
modestly lower, compared with the risk-averse investors.
    The conclusion of the model is that heterogeneity coupled with a
shift in relative resources toward the risk-averse investors can explain
observed changes in the real interest rate without bringing in the
declining growth rate or rising ﬁnancial frictions. The paper makes
no claim that the other forces are not actually inﬂuential, however.
Fundamental to the success of the model is its hypothesis that both
110      International Journal of Central Banking      September 2017


   Figure 3. As the Fraction of Resources in the Hands
   of the Risk Tolerant Declines, the Interest Rate Falls




types of investors behave as if they assigned small but important
probabilities to a substantial negative shock, worse than has actu-
ally occurred since the Great Depression. In this respect, the model
follows the trend in recent ﬁnancial economics, which ﬁnds, for exam-
ple, that such beliefs about rare disasters are the most plausible way
to explain the equity premium.
    One of the manifestations of heterogeneity in investors’ risk aver-
sion is across countries. Investors in some countries, notably the
United States, collectively take on risk from other parts of the world
by maintaining positive net positions in foreign equity and negative
net positions in debt—in eﬀect, these countries borrow from the risk-
averse countries and use the proceeds to buy foreign equity. Thus
the United States is like a leveraged hedge fund. Countries can be
divided into three groups: (i) those that absorb risk by borrowing in
the global debt market and buying foreign equity, (ii) those that shed
risk by lending to the risk absorbers and letting those countries take
on the risk of their own equity, and (iii) those whose risk preferences
are in the middle and choose not to absorb or shed risk and those
whose ﬁnancial markets are undeveloped and do not participate in
global ﬁnancial markets.
Vol. 13 No. 3    Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences      111


     Figure 4. Countries that Absorb Risk by Holding
         Positive Amounts of Net Foreign Equity
          or by Borrowing from Foreign Lenders




Note: Risk-absorbing countries are shown by dark shading. Created with
mapchart.net.


    Figure 4 shows the countries that absorb risk. They are the
advanced countries of western Europe and the countries scattered
around the globe that fell under the inﬂuence of those countries and
became advanced themselves. There appears to be a negative cor-
relation between risk aversion and income per person, as the risk
absorbers are all high-income countries. By far the largest absorber
of risk is the United States.
    Figure 5 shows the countries that shed risk. Most are lower
income. China is by far the largest of the shedders. China holds
large amounts of dollar debt claims on the United States, with recent
growth in its euro debt claims on western Europe. One high-income
country, Japan, is a major risk shedder. The United States and other
risk absorbers hold positive net amounts of foreign equity.
    Figure 6 shows the growth of risk absorption by the United
States. The upper line shows U.S. net borrowing in the debt market
and the lower line net U.S. holdings of foreign equity. The upward
path in debt began in the mid-1980s and the upward path of equity
in the 1990s. Debt continued to rise through 2011 (the last year for
which I have data) while equity fell slightly after the 2008 ﬁnancial
112      International Journal of Central Banking     September 2017


Figure 5. Countries that Shed Risk by Holding Negative
 Amounts of Net Foreign Equity or by Lending Positive
            Amounts to Foreign Borrowers




Note: Risk-shedding countries are shown by dark shading. Created with
mapchart.net.




      Figure 6. Risk Absorption by the United States,
                        1970–2011
Vol. 13 No. 3    Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences      113


       Figure 7. Risk Shedding by China, 1981–2011




crisis. The average of the two measures—taken as an overall measure
of risk absorption—rose from the 1980s and reached a plateau of 0.3
years of GDP.
    Figure 7 shows similar data for China starting in 1981—in ear-
lier years, China was eﬀectively walled oﬀ from the global economy.
Starting in the early 1990s, China shed risk aggressively, reaching
the point just before the crisis of the average of foreign debt owned
and net foreign holdings of Chinese equity claims equal to 0.4 years
of GDP. Following the crisis, Chinese risk shedding has remained at
that level but has not grown.
    Risk splitting occurs within the United States in large volumes
as well. Table 1 shows decade averages of a variety of ﬁnancial
institutions that hold risky ﬁnancial positions funded in part by
debt—held by risk-averse investors such as pension funds—and by
correspondingly riskier equity held by risk-tolerant investors such as
high-wealth households. Government debt is a prominent part of the
risk splitting. In the case of government, the taxpayers make up the
risk-tolerant side—the marginal taxpayer with substantially higher
than average wealth takes on magniﬁed risk by insuring the holders
of government debt. On the private side, numerous types of ﬁnancial
institutions and securities have the eﬀect of splitting risk between
a tranche of low-risk debt and high-risk residual equity claims.
                                                                                     114




             Table 1. Examples of the Scale of Risk-Splitting Institutions

                  Government                               Private
       Consolidated      GSE     Private                            Non-mortgage
       Government GSE Guaranteed Equity Securiti- Non-ﬁnancial       Household
Decade    Debt      Debt Debt    Funds zations Corporate Debt Repos     Debt
1980s     0.469      0.061     0.091    —      0.012      0.163      0.103   0.186
1990s     0.611      0.101     0.204    —      0.086      0.211      0.166   0.204
2000s     0.574      0.203     0.293   0.058   0.233      0.238      0.237   0.239
2010s     0.936      0.126     0.347   0.140   0.109      0.275      0.221   0.251
                                                                                     International Journal of Central Banking
                                                                                     September 2017
Vol. 13 No. 3     Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences        115


        Figure 8. Scale of Risk-Splitting Institutions
                      Relative to GDP




Private equity is a rapidly growing example of this type of ﬁnancial
arrangement. Securitizations with overcollateralized debtlike securi-
ties held by or on behalf of risk-averse investors and residual equity
claims held by risk-tolerant investors grew rapidly until the crisis
but have shrunk since then. Repurchase agreements split risk by
overcollateralization to the extent of the repo haircut. These too
have shrunk relative to GDP since the crisis.
    Figure 8 shows the generally upward trend of the volume of risk
splitting in the United States, stated relative to GDP. Both gov-
ernment and non-government contributions have risen, with some
moderation after the crisis.

5.   Concluding Remarks

Prior to the ﬁnancial crisis in 2008, risk splitting grew steadily, as
revealed in data on both international and domestic ﬁnancial posi-
tions. Safe real interest rates declined in parallel. The crisis resulted
in a downward jump in real rates corresponding to the fall in nom-
inal short rates to essentially zero soon after the crisis struck. The
corresponding real rate was between –1 percent and –2 percent. Real
rates have risen in the United States recently, as nominal rates have
116      International Journal of Central Banking       September 2017


become positive and inﬂation has risen close to the Federal Reserve’s
target of 2 percent, but real rates in other markets remain as nega-
tive as ever in the eight years since the crisis. Because the crisis hit
GDP and asset value harder in advanced countries than in others,
especially China, the inﬂuence studied in my analysis may explain
some part of the drop in the global safe real short rate. In addition,
the crisis may have raised investors’ beliefs about the probability
of adverse events in the future, as in Kozlowski, Veldkamp, and
Venkateswaran (2015). According to the principles considered here,
the safe real rate would fall if the disaster probability rose more for
the risk-averse investors than for the risk tolerant.
    I emphasize again that heterogeneity in risk aversion is only one
of the factors entering a full explanation of the behavior of real rates
over recent decades. Expansionary monetary policy, rising ﬁnancial
frictions, and slowing consumption growth need to be brought into
a full analysis.



References

Bernanke, B. S., C. Bertaut, L. Pounder DeMarco, and S. Kamin.
    2011. “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe
    Assets in the United States, 2003–2007.” International Finance
    Discussion Paper No. 1014, Board of Governors of the Federal
    Reserve System (February).
Caballero, R. J., and E. Farhi. 2016. “The Safety Trap.” March.
    Harvard University, Department of Economics.
Carroll, C. D., and L. H. Summers. 1991. “Consumption Growth
    Parallels Income Growth: Some New Evidence.” In National Sav-
    ing and Economic Performance, ed. B. D. Bernheim and J. B.
    Shovin, 305–48 (chapter 10). University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, M. 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy.” Presidential
    address delivered at the 80th Annual Meeting of the American
    Economics Association, Washington, DC, December 29, 1967.
    American Economic Review 58 (1): 1–15.
Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert. 2015. “Secular Stagnation
    and Returns on Capital.” Economic Synopses (Federal Reserve
    Bank of St. Louis) (19): 1–3.
Vol. 13 No. 3    Low Interest Rates: Causes and Consequences     117


Gourinchas, P.-O., H. Rey, and N. Govillot. 2010. “Exorbitant Priv-
   ilege and Exorbitant Duty.” Discussion Paper No. 10-E-20, Insti-
   tute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan.
Hall, R. E. 2005. “Separating the Business Cycle from Other Eco-
   nomic Fluctuations.” In The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the
   Future, 133–79. Proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the
   Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 25–27.
———. 2015. “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy
   from the Financial Crisis.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,
   Vol. 29, ed. J. A. Parker and M. Woodford, 71–128. University
   of Chicago Press.
———. 2016. “The Role of the Growth of Risk-Averse Wealth in
   the Decline of the Safe Real Interest Rate.” Hoover Institution
   (November).
Hall, R. E., and R. Reis. 2016. “Achieving Price Stability by Manipu-
   lating the Central Bank’s Payment on Reserves.” NBER Working
   Paper No. 22761 (October).
Hansen, L. P., and K. J. Singleton. 1983. “Stochastic Consumption,
   Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns.”
   Journal of Political Economy 91 (2): 249–65.
Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran. 2015. “The
   Tail that Wags the Economy: Beliefs and Persistent Stagnation.”
   NBER Working Paper No. 21719 (November).
Krugman, P. R. 1998. “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return
   of the Liquidity Trap.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
   (2): 137–205.
Laubach, T., and J. C Williams. 2003. “Measuring the Natural Rate
   of Interest.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (4): 1063–70.
