In general, for works created on or after January 1, 1978, the term of copyright is the life of the 
author plus seventy years after the author’s death. If the work is a joint work with multiple authors, 
the term lasts for seventy years after the last surviving author’s death. For works made for hire and 
anonymous or pseudonymous works, the duration of copyright is 95 years from publication or 120 
years from creation, whichever is shorter.
For works created before January 1, 1978, that were not published or registered as of that date, 
the term of copyright is generally the same as for works created on or after January 1, 1978. The law, 
however, provides that in no case would the term have expired before December 31, 2002, and if the 
work was published on or before that date, the term will not expire before December 31, 2047.
For works created before January 1, 1978, that were published or registered before that date, the 
initial term of copyright was twenty-eight years from the date of publication with notice or from the 
date of registration. At the end of the initial term, the copyright could be renewed for another sixtyseven years for a total term of protection of up to ninety-five years. To extend copyright into the 
renewal term, two registrations had to be made before the original term expired: one for the original 
term and the other for the renewal term. This requirement was eliminated on June 26, 1992, and 
renewal term registration is now optional.
For more information on the term of copyright protection, see Duration of Copyright (Circular 15A) 
and Renewal of Copyright (Circular 6A).
How Can I Protect My Work?
Copyright exists automatically in an original work of authorship once it is fixed in a tangible 
medium, but a copyright owner can take steps to enhance the protections of copyright, the most 
important of which is registering the work. Although registering a work is not mandatory, for 
U.S. works, registration (or refusal) is necessary to enforce the exclusive rights of copyright through 
litigation.
Applying a copyright notice to a work has not been required since March 1, 1989, but may still 
provide practical and legal benefits. Notice typically consists of the copyright symbol or the word 
“Copyright,” the name of the copyright owner, and the year of first publication. Placing a copyright 
notice on a work is not a substitute for registration.
Copyright Basics 5
Benefits of Registration
Registration establishes a claim to copyright with the Copyright Office. An application for copyright 
registration can be filed by the author or owner of an exclusive right in a work, the owner of all 
exclusive rights, or an agent on behalf of an author or owner. An application contains three essential 
elements: a completed application form, a nonrefundable filing fee, and a nonreturnable deposit—
that is, a copy or copies of the work being registered and “deposited” with the Copyright Office. 
A certificate of registration creates a public record of key facts relating to the authorship and ownership of the claimed work, including the title of the work, the author of the work, the name and 
address of the claimant or copyright owner, the year of creation, and information about whether 
the work is published, has been previously registered, or includes preexisting material. 
You can submit an application online through www.copyright.gov or on a paper application. 
For more information on registering a work with the Copyright Office, see Copyright Registration 
(Circular 2).
In addition to establishing a public record of a copyright claim, registration offers several other 
statutory advantages:
• Before an infringement suit may be filed in court, registration (or refusal) is necessary for 
U.S. works.2
• Registration establishes prima facie evidence of the validity of the copyright and facts stated in 
the certificate when registration is made before or within five years of publication.
• When registration is made prior to infringement or within three months after publication of a 
work, a copyright owner is eligible for statutory damages, attorneys’ fees, and costs.
• Registration permits a copyright owner to establish a record with the U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP)4
 for protection against the importation of infringing copies.
Registration can be made at any time within the life of the copyright. If you register before publication, you do not have to re-register when the work is published, although you can register the 
published edition, if desired.
Effective Date of Registration
When the Copyright Office registers a work it assigns an effective date of registration to the certificate of registration. The effective date of registration is the day that the Office receives in proper 
form all required elements—an acceptable application, an acceptable deposit, and a nonrefundable 
filing fee. The date is not set until all the required elements are in the Office’s possession. If the 
Office receives incomplete materials, an unacceptable deposit, or an insufficient fee, the effective 
date of registration will be set on the date that the Office receives all the required materials in 
acceptable form. The date is not based on how long it takes the Office to examine the materials or 
mail the certificate of registration.
You do not have to receive your certificate of registration before you publish or produce your 
work. Nor do you need permission from the Copyright Office to place a copyright notice on your 
work. But the Copyright Office must approve or refuse your application before you can file a lawsuit 
for copyright infringement, except in cases involving a non-U.S. work.5
 You may seek statutory damages and attorneys’ fees in an infringement action provided that the infringement began after the 
effective date of registration. The law, however, provides a grace period of three months after publication during which full remedies can be recovered for any infringement begun during the three 
months after publication if registration is made before this period ends.
Copyright Basics 6
Copyright Notice
A copyright notice is a statement placed on copies or phonorecords of a work to inform the public that 
a copyright owner is claiming ownership of the work. A copyright notice consists of three elements:
• The copyright symbol © or (p) for phonorecords, the word “Copyright,” or the abbreviation 
“Copr.”;
• The year of first publication of the work (or of creation if the work is unpublished); and
• The name of the copyright owner, an abbreviation by which the name can be recognized, or a 
generally known alternative designation.
A notice should be affixed to copies or phonorecords of a work in a way that gives reasonable 
notice of the claim of copyright.
Using a copyright notice is optional for unpublished works, non-U.S. works, and works published 
on or after March 1, 1989. However, notice conveys the following benefits:
• It puts potential users on notice that copyright is claimed in the work.
• For published works, notice may prevent a defendant from attempting to limit liability for 
damages or injunctive relief based on an “innocent infringement” defense.
• It identifies the copyright owner at the time of first publication for parties seeking permission 
to use the work.
• It identifies the year of first publication, which can be used to determine the term of copyright 
for anonymous or pseudonymous works or works made for hire.
• It may prevent the work from becoming an “orphan” by identifying the copyright owner or 
specifying the term of copyright. Orphan works are original works of authorship for which 
prospective users cannot identify or locate copyright owners to request permission.
Notice was required for works published in the United States before March 1, 1989. Works published without notice before that date may have entered the public domain in this country. 
For more information, see Copyright Notice (Circular 3