Overview of Major Consumer Finance Markets
The following sections examine specific issues within major consumer debt markets: mortgage
lending, student loans, automobile loans, credit cards and payments, payday loans and other
credit alternative financial products, and checking accounts and substitutes. The markets
discussed are under the jurisdiction of the CFPB, and sometimes other regulators as well. Each
section briefly describes the financial product, recent market developments, and selected policy
issues that may lead each market away from its efficient price or outcomes. These sections focus
on the consumer and household perspective as well as consumer protection policy issues in each
market.
Mortgage Lending Market
A mortgage loan is a loan collateralized by a house and its land.47 Generally, consumers use these
loans to purchase a new home or refinance an existing one. These types of mortgages are often
called first liens, because if a consumer defaults on the loan, the lender is typically the first in line
to be compensated through the proceeds of a home foreclosure. First-lien mortgage loans are
usually installment loans, in which the consumer pays off the loan in monthly installments over
15 years or 30 years. Most mortgage loans in the United States have a fixed interest rate and fixed
installment amount over the course of the loan, affected by the consumer’s credit score and
market conditions.48
Households buying a new home and taking out a mortgage loan to purchase it generally cannot
borrow for the full cost of the house’s value. To limit the risk to the lender, borrowers are
typically required to make a down payment, the difference between the house’s value and the
mortgage loan. If the down payment is less than 20% of the home’s value, the borrower is often
required to pay for additional insurance.
In addition to first-lien purchase mortgages, a consumer may choose to take out a home equity
line of credit (often referred to as HELOC) or a smaller installment mortgage loan, which often is
a second lien. A second lien means that the lender is second in line, after the first lien holder, to be
compensated if the consumer defaults and the home is foreclosed upon. These loans are
underwritten using the value of the home, but can be used for a variety of different purposes
either related to the home or not. For example, second mortgages can be used to renovate the
home, pay for college, or consolidate credit card debts.
Mortgage loans are by far the largest consumer credit market in the United States, and homes are
a large part of most households’ wealth. According to the Fed, more than $9 trillion of mortgage
debt is currently outstanding,49 and more than $20 trillion in real estate equity is owned by households.50 As of the third quarter of 2020, 67.4% of U.S. households owned their home. 51
Many people view homeownership as an important way to build wealth over time, both through
price appreciation and home equity by paying down their mortgage. Nevertheless, because home
prices can fluctuate over time, this investment can be risky, especially if the home owner only
stays in the home for a short time. Although homeownership has certain benefits, such as tax
benefits like the mortgage interest tax deduction,52 it also imposes costs on the household, such as
mortgage loan closing costs and home maintenance.
As noted above, most experts believe that a housing price bubble was a central cause of the 2008
financial crisis. In response, Dodd-Frank reformed the mortgage market by attempting to
strengthen mortgage underwriting standards, to reduce the risk that consumers’ default on their
mortgages, even if house prices fluctuated in the future. Dodd-Frank also directed the CFPB to
update federal mortgage disclosure forms (called the combined TILA/RESPA form) 53 and
improve standards for mortgage servicing (a company who manages mortgage loans after the
loan is originated).54
During and after the financial crisis, mortgage lenders tightened underwriting standards, making
it harder for consumers to qualify for a loan.55 Although most borrowers with good credit scores
continued to qualify for mortgage credit, other borrowers in weaker financial positions found it
more difficult to obtain a mortgage.56 As the economy has recovered from the Great Recession,
concerns exist about whether new consumer compliance regulation in the mortgage market has
struck the right balance between prudent mortgage underwriting and access to credit for potential
borrowers to build wealth.57 Certain features of mortgages during the mortgage boom that were
considered to be particularly risky, such as teaser interest rates and loans with little or no income
verification, are now uncommon in the mortgage market.58 However, research suggests that the
regulation of underwriting standards may have caused lenders to prefer certain borrowers, such as
those with lower debt-to-income ratios.59
Mortgage shopping is another policy issue in this market. Consumers do not tend to shop among
lenders for more advantageous mortgage interest rates, even though large price differences exist in the market. According to the CFPB, nearly half of all borrowers only seriously consider one
lender or broker before taking out a mortgage.60 Given the range of interest rates available to a
consumer at any given time, the CFPB estimates that a consumer could save thousands of dollars
on a mortgage by shopping for the best interest rates.61
More recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the mortgage market. Many consumers
who would likely have experienced difficulty repaying their mortgage loans received loan
forbearance.
62 Loan forbearance plans can prevent a consumer from becoming delinquent, giving
the consumer time to repay the debts owed rather than potentially experiencing adverse
consequences, such as credit score declines or foreclosure.63 As previously mentioned, the
CARES Act established consumer rights to be granted forbearance for federally backed
mortgages for up to a year. The CARES Act’s consumer protections and financial institutions’
loan forbearance programs arguably helped avoid sharp increases in loan delinquencies by
making it possible for many loans to receive forbearance during the spring and summer of 2020.64
However, when these programs expire, some consumers may fall delinquent on their loans,
impacting the mortgage market. In addition, during the second and third quarters of 2020,
mortgage debt balances increased as interest rates reached historic lows, causing more mortgage
refinances and other mortgage finance activity.
65
