ATLANTA, Feb. 14, 2023 – The Coca-Cola Company today reported strong fourth quarter and full-year 2022 results. “While 2022 brought many challenges, we are proud of our overall results in a dynamic operating environment,” said James Quincey, Chairman and CEO of The Coca-Cola Company. “As we begin 2023, we continue to invest in our capabilities and strengthen alignment with our bottling partners to maintain flexibility. We are keeping consumers at the center of our innovation and marketing investments, while also leveraging our expertise in revenue growth management and execution. Our growth culture is leading to new approaches, more experimentation, and improved agility to drive growth and value for our stakeholders.” Highlights Quarterly / Full-Year Performance • Revenues: For the quarter, net revenues were strong, growing 7% to $10.1 billion. Organic revenues (non-GAAP) grew 15%. Organic revenue (non-GAAP) performance was strong across operating segments and included 12% growth in price/mix and 2% growth in concentrate sales. The quarter included one additional day, which resulted in a 1-point tailwind to revenue growth. The quarter also benefited from the timing of concentrate shipments. For the full year, net revenues grew 11% to $43.0 billion, and organic revenues (non-GAAP) grew 16%. This performance was driven by 11% growth in price/mix and 5% growth in concentrate sales. • Operating margin: For the quarter, operating margin, which included items impacting comparability, was 20.5% versus 17.7% in the prior year, while comparable operating margin (non-GAAP) was 22.7% versus 22.1% in the 1 prior year. For the full year, operating margin, which included items impacting comparability, was 25.4% versus 26.7% in the prior year, while comparable operating margin (non-GAAP) was 28.7% in both the current year and the prior year. For both the quarter and the full year, operating margin benefited from strong topline growth but was unfavorably impacted by the BODYARMOR acquisition, higher operating costs, an increase in marketing investments versus the prior year, currency headwinds and items impacting comparability. • Earnings per share: For the quarter, EPS declined 16% to $0.47, and comparable EPS (non-GAAP) was even at $0.45. EPS performance included the impact of a 12-point currency headwind, while comparable EPS (non-GAAP) performance included the impact of an 11-point currency headwind. For the full year, EPS declined 3% to $2.19, and comparable EPS (non-GAAP) grew 7% to $2.48. EPS performance included the impact of an 11-point currency headwind, while comparable EPS (non-GAAP) performance included the impact of a 10-point currency headwind. • Market share: For both the quarter and the full year, the company gained value share in total nonalcoholic readyto-drink (“NARTD”) beverages, which included share gains in both at-home and away-from-home channels. • Cash flow: Cash flow from operations was $11.0 billion for the full year, a decline of $1.6 billion versus the prior year, as strong business performance was more than offset by the deliberate buildup of inventory in the face of a volatile commodity environment, cycling working capital benefits from the prior year, and higher tax payments and annual incentive payments in 2022. Free cash flow (non-GAAP) was $9.5 billion, a decline of $1.7 billion versus the prior year. Company Updates • Evolving company leadership to fuel growth: The company continues to focus on having the right leaders and organizational structure to deliver on its growth strategy, while also developing talent for the future. Through recent leadership appointments, the company continued to optimize its organizational design, connecting functions endto-end while identifying key opportunities to drive meaningful growth over the long term. During the quarter, John Murphy began an expanded role as President and Chief Financial Officer, and added oversight of Global Ventures, Bottling Investments, Platform Services, customer and commercial leadership, and online-to-offline digital transformation. The company also named Henrique Braun to the newly created role of President, International Development to oversee seven of the company’s nine operating units. Braun will steward growth of the consumer base across developing and emerging markets as well as developed markets. Braun will partner with Nikos Koumettis, President of the Europe operating unit, and Jennifer Mann, President of the North America operating unit, on global operational strategy in order to scale best practices and help ensure the company captures growth opportunities across all of its markets.