You have been given this information leaflet as you have been advised to take low dose aspirin, 
 150mg once a day from 12 to 36 weeks of your pregnancy. 
 What is aspirin?
 Aspirin is known as an NSAID (a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug). Aspirin is often used to treat 
 pain, fever, inflammation or prevent clot formation.
 There is evidence that taking low dose aspirin once a day can help increase the function and blood 
 flow of your placenta (afterbirth) which provides your baby with oxygen and nutrients during your 
 pregnancy to help them grow. 
 Why have I been advised to take aspirin?
 Not everyone is recommended to take aspirin in pregnancy. You have been advised to take a low 
 dose of aspirin during your pregnancy to reduce the risk of:
 • developing hypertension (high blood pressure) and pre-eclampsia (high blood pressure and 
 protein in your urine)
 • giving birth to your baby prematurely (before 37 weeks)
 • your baby being smaller than expected
 Your midwife or obstetrician (a doctor who specialises in the care of pregnant women) may 
 recommend that you take low dose aspirin to reduce the risk of hypertension (high blood pressure) if
 one of the following apply to you:
 • you had hypertension (high blood pressure) during a previous pregnancy
 • you have chronic kidney disease
 • you have an auto-immune disease (for example, lupus or antiphospholipid syndrome)
 • you have Type 1 or 2 diabetes
 • you have chronic hypertension (high blood pressure before pregnancy)
 • you have previously given birth to a baby who was smaller than expected
 • you have low Pregnancy Associated Plasma Protein (PAPP-A) screening blood test
 • you are aged 40 years or older
 Low dose aspirin may also be recommended if two or more of the following apply to you:
 • this is your first pregnancy
 • there are more than 10 years between this pregnancy and the birth of your last baby
 • your BMI is 35 or more at your booking appointment
 • there is a family history of pre-eclampsia in a first degree relative
 • this is a multiple pregnancy (for example, twins or triplets)
 You may also be advised to take low dose aspirin if you have a slightly higher chance of having a 
 baby which may be smaller than expected. Or there were any concerns about how your placenta 
 was working in a previous pregnancy; this will be discussed with you. 
 Page 2 of 3
 How and when do I take aspirin? 
 You should take 150mg (2 x75mg tablets) once a day from 12 weeks until 36 weeks of your 
 pregnancy. It is best to take in the evening either with or just after food. 
 Please do not worry if you forget to take a tablet, just take one when you remember, however make 
 sure you only take 150mg once a day. 
 If you think you may be in labour, you can stop taking your aspirin until this is confirmed. It will not 
 increase your risk of bleeding during your labour. 
 Is low dose aspirin safe to take in pregnancy?
 Low dose aspirin is not known to be harmful to you or your baby during pregnancy. In fact it is 
 known to reduce the risk of harm by reducing the risk of high blood pressure, pre-eclampsia, smaller 
 babies and stillbirth. 
 However, aspirin can affect (and be affected by) other medications, including ‘over the
 Counter’ medicines and herbal remedies. Please discuss any other medications you are taking with 
 your midwife, GP or obstetrician.
 Side effects
 Taking low dose aspirin can cause mild indigestion. If you take your aspirin either with or just after 
 food, it will be less likely to upset your stomach. Avoid taking aspirin on an empty stomach. If you 
 also take indigestion remedies, take them at least two hours before or after you take your aspirin.
 There is no evidence to suggest low dose aspirin causes any increase in bleeding during pregnancy 
 or at the time of birth. If you have any questions or concerns about taking low dose aspirin please 
 speak to your obstetrician, GP or midwife. 
 Allergies
 Please tell your obstetrician, midwife or GP if you are allergic to aspirin (or other NSAIDS), or you 
 have severe asthma, chronic kidney problems, stomach ulcers or have been previously advised not 
 to take aspirin or other NSAIDs.
 As with any medicine, you should seek urgent medical assistance if you experience serious 
 side effects such as wheezing, swelling of the lips, face or body, rashes or other indications 
 of an allergic reaction.
 What can I do to help? 
 If you smoke it is very important that you stop as it can affect placental (afterbirth) function and your 
 baby’s growth. Please contact your community or continuity team midwife who can refer you to 
 smoking cessation; you can also self-refer at One You East Sussex 
 Sources of information
 If you would like more information about taking low dose aspirin in pregnancy, your midwife or 
 obstetrician will be happy to answer your questions and advise you