

Preface
A cooperative is a business. As such, it must operate in
a manner compatible with all the laws that apply to a business,
with cooperative principles, and with the needs and desires of
its member-patrons in mind.
To comply with each of these limitations on its operations, a cooperative must have a set of organizational documents
that is uniquely crafted to its particular situation. Drafting new,
and updating old, legal documents of cooperatives takes both
time and expertise. This report is intended to assist persons
organizing new cooperatives, managers and directors of existing
cooperatives, and their professional advisers to develop and
update the important legal documents of cooperatives. It
explains issues to be considered and options that are available.
It provides sample language to be used as a starting point; the
wording is not to be copied without review and thought.
To help distinguish sample document language from
explanatory text, a straight black line has been drawn along the
left-hand margin of the sample document language.
Contents
ORGANIZATION AGREEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Statement of Purposes ...................................................... 2
Organization Committee ................................................... 3
Patronage Commitment ..................................................... 3
Financial Commitment ...................................................... 4
Calling of Membership Meeting ....................................... 6
Accounting .......................................................................... 7
SELECTING THE PROPER STATE
INCORPORATION STATUTE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION ..*...................,..*.*.............t. 11
Heading ............................................................................ 1 1
Name ................................................................................. 1 2
Principal Place of Business ............................................. 12
Purposes ............................................................................ 1 2
Powers ............................................................................... 13
Duration ............................................................................ 15
Directors ........................................................................... 15
Capital Structure ............................................................... 16
Amendment ..................................................................... 20
Signatures ......................................................................... 20
BYLAWS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
Membership ...................................................................... 21
Meetings of Members ...................................................... 24
Directors and Officers ....................................................... 26
Duties of Directors ........................................................... 32
ii
Duties of Officers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Operation at Cost and Members’ Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Equity Redemption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I....... 39
Consent . . . . . . . . . ..f................................................................ 4 0
Nonmember Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Nonpatronage Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2
Handling of Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Dissolution . . . . . . . . ..f............................................................ 4 5
Indemnification . . . . . . . . . ..I....................................I.............. 45
Amendment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
MARKETING AGREEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*................. 4 7
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I...........................................4 6
Sales Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I...........................4 9
Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Termination and Renewal ..****...*.**.*.........................*...... 55
Miscellaneous Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .59
DIRECTOR HANDBOOK . . . . . . ..a.. a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
APPENDIX A. ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
BY DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
APPENDIX B. ALTERNATIVE EQUITY
REDEMPTION BYLAWS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
APPENDIX C. BASE CAPITAL PLAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
. . . 111
Sample Legal Documents
for Cooperatives
Donald A. Frederick, Attorney-Adviser
One of the axioms of business planning is that a strong
foundation is essential if an organization is to have a strong
structure. An important component of a strong cooperative
foundation is a set of basic legal documents that conforms to
Federal, State, and local law and facilitates conducting the business affairs of the association to enhance the mutual well-being
of the members.
This report explains the role each document plays in building the organization and the various issues treated in each document. It discusses options available to members in handling
many of the issues. It also presents sample language as an aid in
preparing initial documents, or in revising existing ones, to
make sure they promote the objectives of the cooperative venture.
Most of the sample language in this report is suitable for
virtually any type of cooperative. Where the language must be
tailored to reflect specific functions of the association, wording
appropriate for an agricultural marketing cooperative is used.
Counsel can help make the necessary modifications to cover
supply and related service organizations and nonagricultural
activities.
One point cannot be stressed too much! Cooperative organizers, advisers, and leaders should not just sit down and copy
these, or any other set, of legal documents and declare them as
their own. These foundation documents should only be adopted
after review by a competent attorney, one who understands the
unique characteristics of cooperatives and the industry in which
the association does business. This will maximize the likelihood
that the documents will conform to applicable law and meet the
specific needs of the association and its members.
One problem in drafting organizational papers is they can
be thorough or simple, but not both. This report contains many
“compromises” between these two objectives. This only reinforces the need for cooperative founders and leaders, and their
professional advisers, to avoid adopting any sample set of documents verbatim and to review existing documents on a regular
basis.
1
The idea of forming a cooperative is usually conceived and
nurtured by a few individuals who foresee coordinated group
action as a solution to a problem confronting themselves and
similarly situated persons. This organizing group often has to
formulate a development plan, arrange for or provide seed
money, and contribute sweat equity to get the association up and
running.
The organization period involves considerable discussion
and data collection. While these efforts provide a good forecast
for the level of support the cooperative is likely to attract, before
launching the venture it is a good idea to have those persons
who say they want the services of the cooperative formally commit to use those services.
The organization agreement secures both a patronage and a
financial commitment from prospective members. It is also a
vehicle for educating prospective members about the cooperative form of business and the objectives of the proposed association.
Statement of Purposes
This first provision in a typical organization agreement sets
out the services the proposed organization will perform. The
services can be described in broad terms, such as to “process”
and “market” certain farm commodities and “furnish” certain
farm supplies.
The language should refer only to services the cooperative
will provide from its inception. This minimizes member pressure to expand the scope of operations too rapidly. For example,
it is usually best not to mention furnishing supplies in the organizational agreement if the new organization will limit its initial
activity to marketing fresh vegetables.
1. The undersigned, a producer of agricultural products, hereinafter referred to as “Producer,”
together with other signers of agreements similar
hereto, propose to organize a cooperative association
2
under the laws of the State of
for the purpose of
.
Organization Committee
Although the association has not yet been incorporated, a
decision making process should be formalized. The organizers
will usually appoint some or all of their group to an official
organization committee that will serve as the initial policy body
for the association. This provision lists the committee members
and sets out the committee’s authority.
2. (a) The association shall be organized with
suitable articles of incorporation and bylaws as
determined by an organizational committee consisting of the following persons:
Name Address
2. (b) This committee may, by vote of a majority of its members, increase its membership, fill any
vacancy therein, and appoint any subcommittees
deemed necessary to conduct its affairs. The committee, or any subcommittee designated by it, may
prescribe an organization fee to be paid by each person signing an organization agreement and may
incur necessary obligations, make necessary expenditures, and take any such action as may, in its discretion, be deemed advisable to further the organization of the association.
3
Patronage Commitment
Most cooperatives, especially those involved in marketing
agricultural commodities, need a minimum level of product to
be successful and the best possible projections of anticipated
volumes to plan effectively. Their organization agreements
should spell out the extent of the prospective members’ commitment: usually all production, a defined volume of product,. or
production from a set number of acres. If either all production
or production from a set number of acres is used, a projection of
likely volume delivered should also be secured. Sample language is provided for each type of commitment:
Full Production.
3. Producer agrees to sign a marketing agreement committing all (product) produced by
Producer, on land owned or leased by Producer, to
the cooperative for direct marketing, processing, or
other disposition as the cooperative sees fit.
Producer estimates such production will total
(units) in (year). ***********
Defined Volume.
3. Producer agrees to sign a marketing agreement to commit (units) of (product), produced by Producer, to the cooperative for
direct marketing, processing, or other disposition as
the cooperative sees fit.
***********
Set Acreage.
3. Producer agrees to sign a marketing agreement to commit all (product) produced by
Producer on acres of land, owned or leased by
Producer, to the cooperative for direct marketing,
processing, or other disposition as the cooperative
sees fit. Producer estimates such production will
total -(units) in _ (year).
4
If the cooperative is likely to have a minimum quality standard that must be met before product will be accepted, that standard should also be explained and the person or entity judging
quality should be named.
Financial Commitment
Every new business must have equity capital. In a cooperative, the members supply that capital. In this provision the
prospective member agrees to provide initial financial support
for the cooperative.
Each prospective member should commit to purchase one
share of common voting stock (or, in a nonstock cooperative, pay
a membership fee) for a fixed dollar amount, perhaps $1,000.
This investment gives the member the right to vote on issues
submitted to the membership.
Often the initial investment tied to membership status does
not raise enough equity to fund the association. Additional capital is needed. Usually the organizers have substantial leeway in
collecting and recognizing this investment. Each prospective
member may be asked to make an equal contribution, or the
level can vary with anticipated patronage. While this investment is classified as preferred stock in this report, it can also be
structured as equity credits, revolving fund credits, or any similar term satisfactory to the organizers.
Organizers should avoid using any term usually associated
with debt capital, such as “note” or “bond,” and should also
avoid creating a second class of common stock, which is sure to
be confused with regular voting common stock.
The agreement should expressly state that this financial
commitment is irrevocable unless the organization effort is terminated. Initial development of the cooperative is totally
dependent on promised financial support being forthcoming.
Leaders must have the tools to force compliance with this commitment, by legal action if necessary.
I
4. Producer agrees to purchase one share of
voting common stock of the association, par value
$ payable on demand following a favorable
vozihe signees of agreements similar hereto to
5
incorporate the association.
Producer further agrees to purchase
shares of nonvoting preferred stock of the association, par value $ each, and agrees to pay for
same as follows:
S- cash on demand following incorporation of the association,
g-on or before . 19 -9
and,
$--- on or before ,19_.
Producer expressly understands that this stock
subscription agreement is an irrevocable legally binding obligation which will be relied upon by the association, other producers who subscribe to its stock,
and lending institutions from which the association
will seek financing to implement its cooperative purposes.
If a cooperative is organized as a nonstock corporation, the
sample language might be altered to call for payment of a membership fee, rather than purchase of a share of common stock,
and payment of an additional sum into an equity account, rather
than purchase of nonvoting preferred stock.
Calling of Membership Meeting
One of the principal responsibilities of the organization committee is to determine if enough firm interest exists to justify forming the cooperative. It is advisable to put a time limit on member
solicitation. An open-ended solicitation period may exceed the
patience of early signees to get started or abort the effort.
If the committee decides there is enough interest, the agreement usually calls for a meeting of the signees to make the final
decision to complete formation and begin operation of the cooperative. While the typical agreement provides that the affirmative vote of a simple majority of signees approves formation, the
committee should move cautiously if substantial resistance
6
develops. Few associations overcome internal strife during the
formation period to become useful and viable cooperative enterprises.
5. If, on or before 9 19-t the organization committee is of the opinion that sufficient
signup has been obtained to enable the association to
operate efficiently, the committee shall set a time
and place for a meeting of those persons who have
signed this agreement to determine, by majority vote,
whether to proceed with the formation and operation of the association, and to consider such other
business as may be deemed appropriate.
Not less than ten days before the meeting,
notice of the time and place of the meeting shall be
sent to all signees by first-class mail, and an appropriate notice shall be published in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the area in
which those who signed agreements like this one
reside.
,
Sometimes the agreement will set minimum levels of support that must be committed before the prospective members
will vote to begin the venture, If the organizers decide to adopt
that option, the first paragraph of this provision might begin:
5. If, on or before 9 19-t bona fide
producers of agricultural products otherwise eligible
to become members in the association agree to execute marketing agreements covering (units)
of (product) and subscribe to provide equity to the association equal to the sum of at least
I dollars, ($ ), the organization committee shall
set a time and place for a meeting . . . (continue as
above).
Accounting
There should be a clearly stated obligation placed on the
organization committee to keep good records and make the
7
appropriate disposition of any funds remaining after the vote on
formation of the cooperative is conducted.
6. The organization committee shall keep
detailed, accurate accounts of all receipts and of all
expenditures of every kind. It shall have such accounts
audited and render a written report thereof to the
board of directors of the association when organized.
And it shall thereupon turn over to the association any
balance remaining in its hands free of obligation. If
the association is not organized, such unexpended balance shall be prorated among, and returned to, those
who contributed to the organization fund.
The agreement should conclude with spaces for the
prospective member to sign the agreement, and provide his or
her address, and for the chairperson of the organizing committee
to sign the agreement as an acceptance.
SELECTING THE PROPER STATE
INCORPORATION STATUTE
While no drafting is involved, and thus no sample language
is provided in this section, an important step in the development of a successful cooperative is selection of the proper statutory foundation for the association.
To operate effectively in today’s business world, a cooperative must be a unique legal entity, separate from its members.
The best way to create this unique entity is to form a cooperative
corporation.
A cooperative becomes a corporation when its organizers
follow the steps set out in a law authorizing the formation of
corporations. There is no Federal incorporation statute.
Cooperatives incorporate under an appropriate State law.
Incorporation offers several advantages over alternative
structures, such as partnerships and unincorporated associations:
l Incorporation facilitates the orderly succession of ownership. The entity has a perpetual life. As some members resign and
new people join, redemption and issuance of a share of common
stock or a membership certificate is a relatively simple means of
clarifying each person’s status and rights in the association.
l A corporation conveys to members and outsiders the
image of a solid, longlasting venture.
l If a cooperative is incorporated, the personal liability of
each individual member, for losses suffered by the cooperative,
is limited to the member’s equity in the cooperative.
The organization of a cooperative as a business corporation
has some important implications for how it conducts its affairs:
l A corporation derives all of its legal authority from the
State. It is a “person” in the eyes of the law, just like a natural
person. It can do many things natural persons can, such as sign
contracts, borrow money, own property, and sue and be sued.
l While its powers are broad, those powers are limited to
the ones granted by the State. For example, when the State agricultural cooperative law says only agricultural producers can
vote in farmer cooperative affairs, no one else has the right to
participate in policy decisions made by the membership.
l The cooperative must obey business laws. Since managers and directors make the decisions for the corporation, they
have an obligation to know and make sure the association follows all applicable laws.
Persons who organize a cooperative have several incorporation statutes to choose from:
l All States have special cooperative incorporation
statutes. Some are broad, permitting the incorporation of virtually any business as a cooperative. Other are limited in scope.
Many States have an Agricultural Cooperative Associations Act
specially written to authorize incorporation of associations of
producers of agricultural products.
9
l Every State has a general business corporation statute. A
cooperative can be incorporated under this law and have its
cooperative character established through proper drafting of the
articles of incorporation and bylaws.
l While most cooperatives are incorporated under a law of
the State where the principle office is located, a few are organized under the laws of a different State.
.It is usually best to organize under a cooperative incorporation statute of the State where the association’s headquarters is
located. But it’s very important that the statute authorizing the
cooperative permits a structure that meets the needs and desires
of the members. The General Business Corporation Act and outof-State incorporation laws should be considered if the applicable cooperative law doesn’t permit the necessary organizational
structure.
A few so-called cooperatives are organized under a general
not-for-profit corporation statute. Usually this is done to make it
easier to obtain grant money. There are some potential adverse
legal consequences of this type of incorporation that should be
reviewed before following this path:
l Most not-for-profit corporation laws expressly forbid the
distribution of any earnings to members, trustees, officers, or
other private persons. This means an association organized
under such a statute can’t pay patronage refunds, one of the
main reasons for operating a business as a cooperative.
0 In many States, if a nonprofit corporation goes out of
business, members are prohibited from sharing in any assets left
after the debts are paid.
l Nonprofit corporations sometimes have had more trouble than cooperative corporations enforcing marketing agreements with their members. Cooperative statutes frequently provide specific authority for enforcement of marketing agreements.
Not-for-profit acts have no such provision.
If the leadership determines a cooperative is not organized
10
under the appropriate State statute, it is usually possible to reincorporate without seriously disrupting the ongoing business of
the association. This will ordinarily involve redrafting the organization papers to conform to the new law and paying a modest
fee to the appropriate State agency.
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
Once the leadership has determined the statute to use as
the legal authority for a cooperative, the first document prepared
is the articles of incorporation (articles). It is the acceptance of
the articles by the State that establishes the cooperative as a
unique “person” under the law.
Most incorporation laws require a fairly common set of
provisions to be included in the articles. These are discussed
below.
The statute will also require that before the articles are official they must be recorded in the office of a designated State
officer. Failure to properly file the articles makes any business
activity vulnerable to legal challenge.
It is usually permissible to include information in the articles beyond that required by the incorporation statute.
However, this is ordinarily not done because it is frequently
more difficult to amend the articles than it is with other documents that may contain the same information.
The articles are not a piece of paper to be prepared and
then forgotten. The articles are routinely given the same respect
by the courts as a statute. Therefore, the articles are binding on
the directors, officers, and manager of a cooperative. Conduct
beyond that authorized in the articles can subject the cooperative and its leaders to potential legal liability.
The following are the elements common to most cooperative articles of incorporation.
Heading
The heading sets out the title of the document, the name of
the cooperative, and the title of the authorization statute.
1 1
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
(Name of Cooperative)
We, the undersigned, all of whom are engaged in the
production of agricultural products, do hereby voluntarily associate ourselves together for the purpose
of forming a cooperative association, with (or without) capital stock, under the provisions of the
Act of the State of
Name
The official name of the cooperative must be stated in the
body of the articles and is usually the first provision:
ARTICLE I. NAME
The name of the association shall be
Principal Place of Business
This is a simple statement of the general location of the
cooperative’s office:
ARTICLE II. PRINCIPAL PLACE
OF BUSINESS
The association shall have its principal place
of business in the city of
County of , Stateof ’ .
Purposes
The purposes for which the cooperative is being organized
are specifically set out. While the purposes clause of the organizational agreement is limited to immediate objectives, the pur12
poses are usually stated as broadly as possible in the articles of
incorporation. Any service the cooperative may someday provide is frequently authorized, at least in a general way. This
reduces the likelihood the articles will have to be amended
whenever the association is asked by the members to provide
additional services.
Powers
ARTICLE III. PURPOSES
The association is formed for the following
purposes: To market for its members and other producers any and all agricultural products or any products derived therefrom: to engage in any activity in
connection with the picking, gathering, harvesting,
receiving, assembling, handling, grading, cleaning,
shelling, standardizing, packing, preserving, drying,
processing, transporting, storing, financing, advertising, selling, marketing, or distribution of any such
agricultural products or any products derived therefrom: to purchase for its members and others farm
supplies and equipment: to manufacture, process,
sell, store, handle, ship, distribute, furnish, supply,
and procure any and all such farm supplies and
equipment; and to exercise all such powers in any
capacity and on any cooperative basis that may be
agreed upon.
The State statute authorizing formation of a cooperative
will set out in detail the activities the cooperative may engage
in. As a general rule, the statutory language is copied virtually
verbatim into the articles. The following is an example of a typical statutory provision restated as an article of incorporation:
ARTICLE IV. POWERS
I
This association shall have the following powers:
13
(a) To borrow money without limitation as to
amount of corporate indebtedness or liability: to give
a lien on any of its property as security therefore in
any manner permitted by law: and to make advance
payments and advances to members and other producers.
(b) To act as the agent or representative of any
member or members in any of the activities mentioned in Article III hereof.
(cl To buy, lease, hold, and exercise all privileges of ownership over such real or personal property as may be necessary or convenient for the conduct and operation of the business of the association,
or incidental thereto.
(d) To draw, make, accept, endorse, guarantee, execute, and issue promissory notes, bills of
exchange, drafts, warrants, certificates, and all kinds
of obligations and negotiable or transferable instruments for any purpose that is deemed to further the
objects for which this association is formed, and to
give a lien on any of its property as security therefor.
(e) To acquire, own, and develop any interest
in patents, trademarks, and copyrights connected
with, or incidental to, the business of the association.
(fl To cooperate with other similar associations in creating central, regional, or national cooperative agencies, for any of the purposes for which
this association is formed, and to become a member
or stockholder of such agencies as now are or hereinafter may be in existence.
(g) To have and exercise, in addition to the
foregoing, all powers, privileges, and rights conferred on ordinary corporations and cooperative
14
marketing associations by the laws of this State and
all powers and rights incidental or conducive to carrying out the purpose for which this association is
formed, except such as are inconsistent with the
express provisions of the act under which this association is incorporated, and to do any such thing
anywhere; and the enumeration of the foregoing
powers shall not be held to limit or restrict in any
manner the general powers which may by law be
possessed by this association, all of which are hereby expressly claimed.
Duration
The articles will say how long the cooperative is authorized to exist. Virtually all modern laws permit perpetual existence. Some laws in effect at the time longstanding cooperatives
were organized limited the permissible life of a cooperative to a
set period of time, such as 50 years. Associations that have been
active for several decades should check to make sure their duration clause provides for perpetual operation.
I
ARTICLE V. PERIOD OF DURATION
This association shall have perpetual existence.
Directors
Most statutes require the articles to name the initial policymakers of the cooperative. A majority of the incorporation
statutes ask for the number of directors and names and addresses of the initial board. The articles often require “at least” the
minimum number of directors required by statute: the precise
number is set in the bylaws. Some statutes ask for the names
and addresses of incorporators, in which case the appropriate
title and references to incorporators would be substituted for
“directors” in the example. If the law asks for both. then this
draft provision is essentially inserted a second time and appro15
priately worded in each instance.
ARTICLE VI. DIRECTORS
This association shall have at least_ directors.
The names and addresses of those who are to
serve as the initial directors are:
NAME ADDRESS
Capital Structure
The articles usually contain a description of the capital
structure of the cooperative. If stock is issued, the number of
shares authorized and the par value of each share of each class
of stock (common, preferred) are set forth. The rights granted
owners of each class of stock, the restrictions on owners of each
class, and the dividends to which each class is entitled are also
explained.
If stock is not issued, a description must be included of
how the rights and interests of the members will be determined.
Sample language for both a stock and a nonstock association is
provided below.
The capital stock example provides for both voting common and nonvoting preferred stock. Nonvoting preferred stock
is a useful way to account for additional nonpatronage investments by members. It has also been used as a way of raising
equity from nonmembers, such as other members of the community interested in supporting the cooperative. If any interest in
the cooperative is being sold to nonmembers, counsel must be
retained to advise the association on applicable securities law
requirements.
The sample language also assumes that the organization
16
limits each member to one vote. If proportional voting based on
patronage is utilized, counsel will have to prepare a description
of how votes will be accumulated and any limit on the number
of votes any one member can amass.
All of the information in the example below is important
and should be included somewhere in the organizational documents. However, not all incorporation laws require that all of it
be in the articles. It may be possible to place some of these provisions in the bylaws.
ARTICLE VII. CAPITAL STOCK (stock cooperative)
Section 1. Classes and Authorized Amounts.
The capital stock of the association shall consist of
shares of common stock with a par value of $
per share, and shares of preferred stock with a
par value of $ per share.
Section 2. Common Stock. The common stock
of this association may be purchased, owned, or held
only by agricultural producers who (1) patronize the
association in accordance with uniform terms and
conditions prescribed by it, and (2) have been
approved by the board of directors.
‘Producer’ shall mean and include persons
(natural or corporate) engaged in the production of
(product), or other agricultural products,
including tenants of land used for the production of
any such product, and lessors of such land who
receive as rent therefore part of any such product of
such land, and cooperative associations (corporate or
otherwise) of such producers.
Each member shall hold only one share of
common stock and each eligible holder of common
stock shall be entitled to only one vote in any meeting of the stockholders upon each matter submitted
to vote at a meeting of the stockholders.
In the event the board of directors of the association shall find, following a hearing, that any of
17
the common stock of this association has come into
the hands of any person who is not eligible for membership, or that the holder thereof has ceased to be
an eligible member, such holder shall have no rights
or privileges on account of such stock, or vote or
voice in the management or affairs of the association
other than the right to participate in accordance with
law in case of dissolution, The association shall
repurchase such stock for par value. If such holder
fails to deliver any certificate evidencing the stock,
the association may cancel such certificate on its
books and records, and the certificate is thereby null
and void.
The common stock of this association may be
transferred only with the consent of the board of
directors of the association and on the books of the
association, and then only to persons eligible to hold
it. No purported assignment or transfer of common
stock shall pass to any person not eligible to hold it,
nor the rights or privileges on account of such stock,
nor a vote or voice in the management of the affairs
of the association.
This association shall have a lien .on all of its
issued common stock for all indebtedness of the
holders thereof to the association.
No dividends shall be paid on the common
stock.
Section 3. Preferred Stock. The preferred
stock of this association may be issued to any person, association, partnership, or corporation.
Preferred stock shall carry no voting rights.
Noncumulative dividends not to exceed
percent (_%) per year may be paid on preferred
stock at the absolute discretion of the board of directors.
Preferred stock may be transferred only on the
books of the association. It may be redeemed in
whole or in part on a pro rata basis at par, plus any
dividends declared and unpaid, at any time on thirty
18
(30) days’ notice by the association, provided said
stock is redeemed in the same order as originally
issued by years. If the owner fails to deliver any certificate evidencing such stock, the association may
cancel the stock on its books.
This association shall have a lien on all of its
issued preferred stock for all indebtedness of the
holders thereof to the association.
Upon dissolution or distribution of the assets
of the association, the holders of all preferred stock
shall be entitled to receive the par value of their
stock, plus any dividend declared and unpaid, before
any distribution is made on the common stock.
*ii*********
ARTICLE VII. MENBERSHIP
(nonstock cooperative)
The association shall not have capital stock
but shall admit applicants to membership in the
association upon such uniform conditions as may be
prescribed in its bylaws. This association shall be
operated on a cooperative basis for the mutual benefit of its members as producers. Membership in the
association shall be restricted to producers and associations of producers who shall patronize the association,
The voting rights of the members of the association shall be equal, and no member shall have
more than one vote upon each matter submitted to a
vote at a meeting of the members.
The property rights and interests of each
member in the association shall be unequal and shall
be determined and fixed on a patronage basis, and
the net proceeds from the business of the association
shall be allocated to member-patrons in the proportion that the patronage of each member bears to the
total patronage of all the members of the association.
19
Amendment
The articles may be changed whenever the appropriate percentage of the membership (and, if required by statute, the directors), as set out in the incorporation statute, votes to amend
them. While the percentage is established by law, it is a good
idea to include that requirement in the articles to remind people
that the articles can be changed and to eliminate doubt as to the
supp,ort required when the issue of possible amendment arises.
While a majority of the statutes set the requirement at a
simple or two-thirds majority of the members voting, several
statutes require approval of a majority of the total membership.
If turnout for member meetings is light, this poses a serious
obstacle to changing the articles.
ARTICLE VIII. Amendment
These articles may be amended upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members actually
voting on the proposed amendment.
Signatures
Those persons who ask the State to authorize the cooperative, often called incorporators, complete the document by signing it.
Signed this day of ,19__, by the
undersigned incorporators, all of whom are engaged
in agriculture as bona fide producers of agricultural
products.
I
20
BYLAWS
Shortly after the cooperative is incorporated, the members
adopt a set of bylaws. Bylaws provide a detailed description of
the structure and method of operation of the cooperative.
Bylaws are a working plan for how the association should function.
Most incorporation laws give members flexibility to structure their cooperative as they see fit. Most references to bylaws
are permissive, giving members the authority to write their own
rules on how to handle a particular issue.
Bylaws normally are not filed with the State. But like the
articles, they are treated in a manner similar to statutes by the
courts. Failure of the leadership to follow the bylaws can also
lead to legal liability.
Numerous provisions are usually found in cooperative
bylaws. Some are similar to those included in bylaws of forprofit corporations, others are unique to cooperation. The most
common provisions are discussed in this report. But a cooperative is free to place virtually any rule on the conduct of its affairs
in the bylaws, provided the provision doesn’t conflict with an
applicable law or the articles of incorporation.
While almost any activity can be covered by a bylaw, only
broad issues of long-term significance to members should be the
subject of a bylaw. Operating decisions should not be covered in
the bylaws, but rather in board policy resolutions. Board policies are directives to the management, issued by the board in its
role as policymaker for the cooperative, that can be changed to
reflect changing conditions at any time by the board. For example, whether the cooperative will do business with nonmembers
is a general, long-term decision that should be covered in the
bylaws. How nonmembers will be charged to insure that they
pay their fair share of cooperative expenses is a short-term decision requiring the flexibility possible under a policy statement.
Membership
The first bylaw usually states the qualifications to be a
member of the cooperative. Membership should be limited to
21
persons who will patronize the cooperative. For an agricultural
cooperative, this means membership should be limited to producers of agricultural products and other farmer cooperative
associations. Limiting the membership to producers and producer cooperatives is essential if the association wants to qualify
for the limited antitrust protection of the Capper-Volstead Act,
or for tax treatment under section 521 of the Internal Revenue
Code, or if the cooperative is incorporated under a State law that
requires that members be agricultural producers.
This bylaw may also include other reasonable prerequisites
to membership, such as agreeing to purchase a share of stock,
sign a marketing agreement, and patronize the association on a
regular basis.
This bylaw should also provide for the orderly termination
of a membership. This can be particularly important for an agricultural cooperative. The significant legal privileges listed
above are only available to associations of producers. This
requirement is only met if the membership of anyone who stops
farming is revoked.
When a membership is terminated, it is a good practice to
return the purchase price of the voting share of common stock,
or the membership fee in a nonstock cooperative (but not necessarily the retained patronage investments). This makes it clear
to the former member that the termination was more than a symbolic gesture and that he or she no longer has the right to participate in the policymaking of the association.
This sample language is written for a stock cooperative. In
a nonstock cooperative, appropriate references to membership
certificates and fees would be substituted for the terms common
stock and purchase price.
I
ARTICLE I. MEMBERSHIP
Section 1. Qualifications. Any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or association, including
both landlord and tenant in share tenancies, who is a
bona fide producer of agricultural products in the
territory in which the association is engaged in business, and who agrees to be a patron of the associa22
tion, signs a marketing agreement with the association, purchases one share of common stock, and
meets such other conditions as may be prescribed by
the board of directors, may become a member of the
association.
All applications for membership must be
approved by the board of directors. Member status
is effective as of the time the board approves the
application for membership.
Section 2. Suspension or Termination. In the
event the board of directors of the association shall
find, following a hearing, that any of the common
stock of this association has come into the hands of
any person who is not eligible for membership, or
that the holder thereof has ceased to be an eligible
member, or that such holder has not marketed
through the association the products covered by a
marketing agreement with the association, or not
otherwise patronized the association for a period of
(_) year(s), or otherwise violated the articles of incorporation, bylaws, or other agreements made with the
association, the association may suspend such holder’s rights as a member and terminate the membership.
When a membership is terminated, the association shall repurchase the member’s share of common stock for par value. The holder shall return to
the association the certificate evidencing the holder’s
share of stock. If such holder fails to deliver the certificate, the association may cancel such certificate
on its books and records, and the certificate is then
null and void.
A suspended or terminated member shall
have no rights or privileges on account of any stock
held, nor vote or voice in the management or affairs
of the association other than the right to participate
in accordance with law in case of dissolution.
23
Meetings of Members
A cooperative is owned and controlled by its members. A
bylaw sets out the ground rules for convening the members to
exercise their control function.
An annual meeting is held each year to elect directors,
review past performance and future plans, and conduct other
business as needed.
It is often a good idea to set the time of the annual meeting
as promptly as possible after the end of the fiscal year. This
encourages management to close the books for the year in a
timely fashion and the auditor to review financial results and
issue the audit report without delay. Also, the members are still
focusing on last year’s performance. If the annual meeting is
delayed too long, the members are often into another production
cycle and not able to properly exercise their control over the
cooperative.
This bylaw should also authorize special member meetings
to handle any business that can’t wait until the next annual
meeting.
Members should receive sufficient advance notice so they
can plan to attend meetings. Many incorporation statutes have
specific minimum notice requirements, both in terms of lead
time (often 10 days or 2 weeks) and method (direct mail, publication in local newspaper). Associations incorporated under
such a law must make sure the bylaw provides at least as much
notice as the statute requires, and that appropriate notice is actually given. Otherwise any action taken at the meeting may be
open to legal challenge.
A statement on how voting will be conducted is also appropriate in this bylaw. How many votes each member will have is
only one aspect of this issue. The draft language limits each
member to one vote. If proportional voting is used, a description of how members will qualify for multiple votes, and a limit,
if any, on the number of votes any one member can accumulate,
should be substituted in the applicable place.
Language on voting on behalf of members organized as
partnerships and corporations can avoid an embarrassing dispute right before or even during a membership meeting over
how such a member will vote on an issue. Many cooperatives
24
have members organized as partnerships or corporations designate, in writing, who will cast the member’s vote, and that person alone can vote for the member until the member provides a
valid written notice of a change in the designee.
Other topics that should be addressed include proxy voting, voting by mail, and cumulative voting. There is no “right”
way to handle these matters, although cumulative voting is usually prohibited. Sometimes the incorporation statute discusses
proxy voting and voting by mail. Many cooperatives that permit
proxy voting limit the number of proxies a member can vote,
often to only one. If voting by mail is allowed, it is often limited
to issues discussed in the meeting notice.
Finally, the minimum number of members that need be
present to conduct business, called a quorum, should be specified. If the statute permits, quorum requirements are frequently
set low (e.g., 10 members or 10 percent of the membership,
whichever is greater) so meetings will not have to be adjourned
for lack of a quorum. While this exposes the association to control by an active minority, it is sometimes necessary in order to
make sure that any business is conducted at all.
ARTICLE II. MEETINGS OF MEMBERS
Section 1. Annual Meeting. The annual meeting of the members of this association shall be held
in the State of , during the month of
-9at such time and in such place as the board of
directors shall designate.
Section 2. Special Meetings. Special meetings of the members of the association may be called
at any time by order of the board of directors and
shall be called upon written request of at least
members, or at least _ percent (__%) of the membership, whichever is a greater number.
Section 3. Notice of Meetings. Written notice of
every regular and special meeting of members shall
be prepared and mailed to the last known post office
25
address of each member not less than -0 days
before such meeting. Such notice shall state the
nature of the business expected to be conducted and
the time and place of the meeting. No business shall
be transacted at any special meeting other than that
referred to in the notice.
Section 4. Voting. Unless otherwise stated in
the articles of incorporation, or these bylaws, or
required by applicable law, all questions shall be
decided by a vote of a majority of the members voting thereon.
Each member shall be entitled to only one
vote, Voting by mail shall not be permitted. Proxy
voting shall be allowed. Each proxy shall be in writing, and no member shall vote more than one proxy.
Cumulative voting is not permitted.
If a membership is held by a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, the member shall designate in writing the person who shall vote on behalf
of the member. That designation shall remain in
effect until written notice of a properly authorized
change in the designated voter shall be received by
the association.
Section 5. Quorum.( members or
percent I%) of the membership, whichever is a
larger number, shall constitute a quorum at any
properly called annual or special membership meeting.
Directors and Officers
While the members own and control the cooperative, the
responsibility for continuous supervision of the association is
usually delegated to a small group of democratically elected
leaders referred to as the board of directors, who in turn select
officers to carry out specific leadership duties. Many cooperative experts consider the selection of directors as the most
important governance decision made by the membership.
26
This bylaw covers the administrative rules for the selection
of directors and officers and for the conduct of their meetings.
Many important issues are discussed in this provision.
Number and Qualification of Directors. The specific number and qualifications of directors must be established. The
incorporation law will usually prescribe a minimum number of
directors. There is no legal maximum on the size of a board, but
experience suggests that if more than about nine people are on a
local cooperative board, efficiency is reduced substantially.
Many State statutes require that all directors be members of
the cooperative. Some permit, or even require, one or more outside directors. The sample bylaw requires directors to be association members. If outside directors are to be authorized, the
number and manner of selection should be included in the
bylaw.
Directors have access to pricing and other marketing plans
that could be used by a competitor to take business from the
cooperative. Thus, many cooperatives bar persons affiliated
with competitors of the association from being directors.
Cooperatives usually do not, however, bar such persons from
membership. For example, a farmer who sells produce directly
to a grocery chain may belong to and market some produce
through a cooperative that also sells wholesale, but that farmer
is frequently denied access to a seat on the cooperative board.
A few cooperatives guarantee board turnover by limiting
the number of consecutive terms a director can serve.
Director and Officer Selection. The rules for election of
directors by the members, and officers by the directors, are set
out in the bylaws. In many cooperatives the directors are elected for three-year terms on a staggered basis. While directors are
usually elected from the membership at large, some cooperatives
elect directors on the basis of geographic regions, usually called
districts. Sample language authorizing the election of directors
by districts is set out in Appendix A.
Officers are usually elected for one-year terms. Even many
statutes that require all directors to be association members permit some officers, notably the secretary and treasurer, to be nonmembers of the association. This allows staff employees who
normally keep association records and books to have both the
appropriate title and attendant responsibilities.
27
Sometimes directors and officers are not able to serve their
full term. The bylaws should provide for a method to fill vacant
director and officer positions, Usually the remaining directors
select an interim director to fill a board vacancy until the next
membership meeting. Directors can usually select a replacement officer at any properly called board meeting.
Meetings. The bylaws frequently provide much of the
same information for director meetings as for member meetings
-
regular and special meetings are authorized, notice and quorum requirements are set out.
Compensation . Another issue that should be addressed is
director compensation. Many directors spend innumerable
hours each year overseeing and promoting the cooperative. It
seems reasonable for the association to at least cover out-ofpocket expenses incurred on behalf of the association.
Some cooperatives also pay a modest fee for each meeting
directors attend, or time they spend on cooperative affairs.
While reimbursement of reasonable expenses is usually covered
with a blanket authorization, fees should be handled more delicately. Directors should not have the right to set their own compensation. Both the decision to pay any fee, and the level of any
fee authorized, should be made by the members.
Nepotism. Many cooperatives also have a bylaw provision
preventing directors and members of their immediate families
from holding salaried positions with the cooperative. This
antinepotism language eliminates the chance some members
might view the awarding of the position as the result of undue
influence of the director, rather than selection on the basis of
merit.
Removal of Directors. Finally, it may be necessary at some
time to remove a director from that position. Sometimes termination is automatic, e.g., failure to maintain member status or
missing too many board meetings. The ultimate authority in a
cooperative is vested in the members, and they should be able to
remove a director at will.
As this is often a severe and divisive undertaking, it is best
to provide a procedure in the bylaws that affords due process for
the director under attack and conforms closely to any procedural
requirements set out in the incorporation statute.
28
ARTICLE III. DIRECTORS
AND OFFICERS
Section 1. Number and Qualification of
Directors. The association shall have a board of
directors of _(_) members. Each director elected
shall be a member of this association in good standing.
No person shall be eligible to be a director if
that person is in competition with, or is affiliated
with any enterprise that is in competition with, the
association. If a majority of the board of directors of
the association finds at any time following a hearing
that any director is so engaged or affiliated that person shall thereupon cease to be a director.
No director after having served for I ) consecutive full term(s) shall be eligible to succeed himself or herself, but after a lapse of _ I_) yed4 d-d
again be eligible.
Section 2. Election of Directors. At the first
annual meeting of the members of this association,
directors shall be elected to succeed the incorporating directors. _ director(s) shall be elected for one
(1) year: _ directors for two (2) years and _directors for three (3) years. At each annual meeting
thereafter, new directors shall be elected, for a term
of three (3) years each, to succeed those directors
whose terms are expiring.
All directors shall be elected by secret ballot,
and the nominee(s) receiving the greatest number of
votes shall be elected.
Section 3. Election of Officers. The board of
directors shall meet within seven (7) days after the
first election and within seven (7) days after each
annual election and shall elect by ballot a president,
vice president, secretary, and treasurer, each of
whom shall hold office until the election and qualifi29
cation of a successor, unless earlier removed., by
death, resignation, or for cause.
The president and vice president shall be
members of the board of directors. The secretary
and treasurer need not be directors or members of
the association.
Section 4. Vacancies. Whenever a vacancy
occurs in the board of directors, other than from the
expiration of a term of office, the remaining directors
shall appoint a member to fill the vacancy until the
next regular meeting of the members. If the term of
the vacating director does not expire at that regular
member meeting, a special election shall be held to
select a director to fill the year or years remaining in
that term.
If one or more officer positions become
vacant, such offices shall be filled by the board of
directors, through election by ballot, at either a regular or special meeting of the board.
Section 5. Regular Board Meetings. In addition to the meetings mentioned above, regular meetings of the board of directors shall be held monthly,
or at such other times and at such places as the
board may determine.
Section 6. Special Board Meetings. A special
meeting of the board of directors shall be held whenever called by the president or by a majority of the
directors. Only the business specified in the written
notice shall be transacted at a special meeting. Each
call for a special meeting shall be in writing, shall be
I signed by the person or persons calling the meeting,
shall be addressed and delivered to the secretary,
and shall state the time and place of such meeting.
Section 7. Notice of Board Meetings. Oral or
written notice of each meeting of the board of directors shall be given each director by, or under the
30
supervision of, the secretary of the association not
less than _ hours prior to the time of meeting. But
such notice may be waived by all the directors, and
their appearance at a meeting shall constitute a
waiver of notice.
Section 8. Quorum. A majority of the board
of directors shall constitute a quorum at any meeting
of the board.
Section 9 . Reimbursement and
Compensation. The association shall reimburse
directors for all reasonable expenses incurred in carrying out their duties and responsibilities.
The compensation, if any, of the members of
the board of directors shall be determined by the
members of the association at any annual or special
meeting of the association.
No member of the board of directors, or member of the immediate family of any board member,
shall occupy any position in the association on regular salary.
Section 10. Removal of Directors. Whenever
any director shall fail to meet the qualifications as
described in Section I of this Article, or fails to
attend three (3) consecutive board meetings, either
regular or special, without just cause and provided
that notice of such meetings has been given in accordance with these bylaws, then it shall be the duty of
the board to remove said director and to fill the
vacancy in accordance with Section 4 of this Article.
Members, through petition noting the charges
and signed by at least _(J members or _ percent (_%) of the membership, whichever is a greater
number, may request the removal of any member of
the board. Such director shall be notified in writing
of the charges and given an opportunity to be heard
at a membership meeting of the association.
Removal of a director shall require a vote of of
31
I
members voting. Any vacancy resulting from such
action shall be filled by nomination and vote of
members at such meeting.
Duties of Directors
The directors are responsible for the ongoing operations of
the cooperative. They set policy and oversee the staff operations
that implement that policy. Cooperative bylaws often contain
language placing a legally binding obligation on the directors to
carry out their most important duties.
This bylaw often establishes the general relationship
between the directors and the manager. An important responsibility of the board is to hire and supervise the manager. The
board sets manager compensation and benefits. The manager,
not the board, runs the day-to-day business operations of the
cooperative. This includes hiring and firing other employees. If
the board is dissatisfied with the way the cooperative is conducting its affairs, it should exercise its authority to replace the
manager, but it should not take on the manager’s responsibilities.
The bylaw should also recognize another important board
responsibility-protecting member assets-by providing for
appropriate bonds and insurance, an accounting and auditing
system, and board control of association funds.
Finally, the board should have the authority to appoint
committees so its work load can be handled efficiently.
Sometimes specific reference is made to an executive committee. An executive committee with broad powers can be useful,
especially when the membership is spread over a large geographic area and some directors have to travel some distance to
attend meetings. But the other directors must be careful not to
abdicate all board responsibility to the executive committee.
ARTI&E IV. DUTIES OF DIRECTORS
Section 1. Management of Business. The
board of directors shall have general supervision and
control of the business and the affairs of the associa32
tion and shall make all rules and regulations not
inconsistent with law, the articles of incorporation,
or bylaws for the management of the business and
the guidance of the members, officers, employees, I
and agents of the association.
Section 2. Employment of Manager. The
board of directors shall have power to employ,
define duties, fix compensation, and dismiss a manager with or without cause at any time. The board
shall authorize the employment of such other
employees, agents, and counsel as it from time to
time deems necessary or advisable in the interest of
the association. The manager shall have charge of
the business of the association under the direction of
the board of directors.
Section 3. Bonds and Insurance. The board
of directors shall require the manager and all other
officers, agents, and employees charged by the association with responsibility for the custody of any of
its funds or negotiable instruments to give adequate
bonds. Such bonds, unless cash security is given,
shall be furnished by a responsible bonding company and approved by the board of directors, and the
cost thereof shall be paid by the association.
The board of directors shall provide for the
adequate insurance of the property of the association, or property which may be in the possession of
the association, or stored by it, and not otherwise
adequately insured, and, in addition, adequate insurance covering liability for accidents to all employees
and the public.
Section 4. Accounting System and Audits.
The board of directors shall have installed an
accounting system which shall be adequate to meet
the requirements of the business and shall require
proper records to be kept of all business transactions.
33
Duti
34
At least once in each year the board of directors shall secure the services of a competent and disinterested public auditor or accountant, who shall
make a careful audit of the books and accounts of the
association and render a report in writing thereon,
which report shall be submitted to the directors and
the manager of the association and made available to
the members of the association.
This report shall include at least a balance
sheet showing the true assets and liabilities of the
association, and an operating statement for the fiscal
period under review.
Section 5. Depository. The board of directors
shall select one or more banks to act as depositories
of the funds of the association and determine the
manner of receiving, depositing, and disbursing the
funds of the association and the form of checks and
the person or persons by whom they shall be signed,
with the power to change such banks and the person
or persons signing such checks and the form thereof
at will.
Section 6. Committees. The board may, at its
discretion, appoint from its own membership an
executive committee of _members, and determine
their tenure of office and their powers and duties.
The board may delegate to the executive committee
all or any stated portion of the functions and powers
of the board, subject to the general direction,
approval, and control of the board. Copies of the
minutes of any meeting of the executive committee
shall be mailed to all directors within seven (7) days
following such meeting.
The board of directors may, at its discretion,
appoint such other committees as it deems appropriate.
5 of Officers
Nhile the tasks that go with each major office of a corpora-
tion are generally well understood, it is still important to have
those duties spelled out in the bylaws. This will minimize any
uncertainty over the roles each plays in leading the association.
ARTICLE V. DUTIES OF OFFICERS
Section 1. Duties of President. The president
shall (1) preside over all meetings of the association
and of the board of directors: (2) call special meetings of the board of directors; (3) appoint such committees as the board of directors may deem advisable
for the proper conduct of the cooperative: and (4)
perform all acts and duties usually performed by a
presiding officer.
Section 2. Duties of Vice President. In the
absence or disability of the president, the vice president shall perform the duties of the president, provided, however, that in case of death, resignation, or
disability of the president, the board of directors
may declare the office vacant and elect any eligible
person president.
Section 3. Duties of Secretary. The secretary
shall keep a complete record of all meetings of the
association and of the board of directors and shall
have general charge and supervision of the books
and records of the association. The secretary shall
sign papers pertaining to the association as authorized or directed by the board of directors. The secretary shall serve all notices required by law and by
these bylaws and shall make a full report of all matters and business pertaining to the office to the members at the annual meeting. The secretary shall keep
the corporate seal and all books of blank certificates,
complete and countersign all certificates issued, and
affix the corporate seal to all papers requiring a seal:
shall keep complete stock ownership records: shall
make all reports required by law: and shall perform
35
such other duties as may be required by the association or the board of directors. Upon the election of a
successor, the secretary shall turn over all books and
other property belonging to the association.
Section 4. Duties of Treasurer. The treasurer
shah be responsible for the keeping and disbursing
of all monies of the association, and shall keep accurate books of accounts of all transactions of the association. The treasurer shall perform such duties
with respect to the finances of the association as may
be prescribed by the board of directors. At the expiration of his term of office, the treasurer shall
promptly turn over to his successor all monies, property, books, records, and documents pertaining to his
office or belonging to the association.
Operation at Cost and Members’ Capital
Many of the unique aspects of the bylaws of a cooperative
pertain to the association’s financial affairs. Tax law plays an
important part in structuring these provisions. This report does
not attempt to explain cooperative taxation but only makes passing references to tax terms when explaining the importance of
certain bylaw provisions.
Since the overall objective of a cooperative is to maximize
the income of its members, leaders must have flexibility to
acquire capital and minimize taxes. The next several provisions, up to and including dissolution, authorize business and
tax planning options compatible with doing business on a cooperative basis.
This section often starts with a straightforward statement
that the association will operate on a service-at-cost basis for the
mutual benefit of the members as patrons and then covers specific issues to implement that statement.
Language is usually included to allocate margins on a
patronage basis. Allocation can be based on the volume or the
value of business conducted on a patronage basis. Cooperatives
dealing in one commodity, or in similar commodities, usually
use the volume method. Those that handle several products
3s
with divergent values often use the dollar-value-of-business
method. The sample language assumes that the association is a
marketing cooperative using the volume method. Appropriate
wording for supply cooperatives and those using the value
method is provided in parentheses.
Marketing cooperatives have an alternative method of raising equity capital, the collection of per-unit retains. Language
authorizing this option should be included in their bylaws.
The term “capital credits” is used in the sample language
to distinguish the retained margins and per-unit retains from
direct member investments in stock. This distinction simplifies
establishing an equity redemption program for patronage-based
investments apart from any redemption of direct investments.
The bylaw should specify whether dividends will be paid
on this patronage capital.
Since the completeness and accuracy of each patron’s
account is vital to assigning financial obligations and benefits in
the appropriate manner, a provision obligating the association to
keep the required records is an important protection for the
members.
A statement requiring the timely distribution of written
notices of allocation and per-unit retain certificate is both good
business practice and a requirement for favorable tax treatment
under the Internal Revenue Code. That statement should authorize the board to issue those notices and certificates, in either
qualified or nonqualified form, so as to maximize the tax planning alternatives available.
ARTICLE VI. OPERATION AT COST
AND MEMBERS’ CAPITAL
Section 1. Operation at Cost. The association
shall at all times be operated on a cooperative service-at-cost basis for the mutual benefit of its member patrons.
Section 2. Margin Allocation. In order to
induce patronage and to assure that this association
37
will operate on a service-at-cost basis in all its transactions with its members, the association is obligated to account on a patronage basis to all member
patrons on an annual basis for all amounts received
from business conducted with members on a patronage basis, over and above the cost of providing such
services and making reasonable additions to
reserves. Such allocation shall be on the basis on
the volume (dollar value) of product marketed
through (purchased from) the association.
The association is hereby obligated to pay all
such amounts to the patrons in cash or by credits to
a capital account of each member patron.
Section 3. Per-Unit Retains. Each member
also agrees to provide capital in such amounts as
determined by the board of directors based on physical units of product marketed through the association. Such per-unit retains shall be allocated to the
member’s capital credit account,
Section 4. Dividends. No dividends shall be
paid on any capital credits.
Section 5. Records and Documentation. The
books and records of the association shall be set up
and kept in such a manner that at the end of each fiscal year, the amount of capital, if any, so furnished
by each member is clearly reflected and credited in
an appropriate record to the capital account of each
member.
The association shall, within 8-l/2 months
after the close of each fiscal year, notify each member of the capital so credited to the member’s
account. The notice shall be in the form of a written
notice of allocation or per-unit retain certificate (as
those terms are used in Subchapter T of the Internal
Revenue Code) or other appropriate written document. The board shall have discretion to issue such
38
notices and certificates in either “qualified” or “nonqualified” form as permitted by the Internal Revenue
Code and other applicable law.
Section 6. Fiscal Year. The fiscal year of this
association shall commence on the first day of
(month) and end on the last day of
(preceding month).
Equity redemption
A bylaw authorizing redemption of patronage capital and
explaining the method to be used helps insure that, to the extent
possible, current patrons finance the cooperative.
There are three types of equity redemption plans. Most
cooperatives that have an equity redemption program use a
revolving fund plan whereby equities are redeemed in the order
in which they were allocated. The first paragraph of the sample
bylaw presents this approach.
A limited number of cooperatives redeem a percentage of
all outstanding equities each year. Sample language to implement this plan is found in section 1 of the Alternative Equity
Redemption Bylaw (Appendix B).
A few cooperatives have adopted a base capital plan.
Under a base capital plan each member is assigned responsibility for providing a pro rata share of needed capital based on proportional use of the cooperative during a base period. A sample
bylaw authorizing a Base Capital Plan is presented in Appendix
C. Associations interested in such a plan should contact a professional adviser who can draft a scheme tailored to the association’s unique needs.
Some cooperatives grant the board discretion to retire outstanding member equity “out of order” as it deems in the best
interests of the association. Sample language for implementation of the discretionary approach appears in the second paragraph of the sample bylaw below.
Other cooperatives provide a specific redemption preference for equity of the estates of deceased members and/or retired
members who have reached a certain age. An event-specific
preferences clause can be complex, particularly if it attempts to
39
deal with the special problems created by members organized as
legal entities and thus do not regularly retire or die. Sample language covering this situation is provided in section 2 of the sample bylaw in Appendix B.
New associations are not going to be in a position to redeem
equity for several years. But an early commitment to develop a
regular equity redemption program and agreement on the rules for
its implementation will strengthen an association’s cooperative
character and give early supporters some assurance that they will
get their investment back at some time in the future.
Consent
ARTICLE VII. EQUITY REDEMPTION
Section I. Regular Redemption, Revolving
Fund. If at any time the board of directors determines
that the financial condition of the association will not
be impaired thereby, capital credited to members’
accounts may be redeemed in full or in part. Any
such redemption of capital shall be made in order of
priority according to the year in which the capital was
furnished and credited, the capital first received by
the association being the first redeemed.
Section 2. Discretionary Special Redemptions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of these bylaws,
the board, at its absolute discretion, shall have the
power to retire any capital credited to members’
accounts on such terms and conditions as may be
agreed upon by the parties in any instance in which the
interests of the association and its members are deemed
to be furthered thereby and funds are determined by
the board to be available for such purposes.
If the cooperative is to deduct the face value of written
notices of allocation and per-unit retain certificates from taxable
income in the year issued, the Internal Revenue Code requires
patrons to consent to include those amounts in taxable income
40
in the year they receive a notice or certificate, even though the
cooperative retains the funds. The simplest way to obtain consent from members is to include a bylaw making consent a condition for membership. The Internal Revenue Service has published a model consent bylaw which should be adopted.
Another paragraph is inserted making it clear that the
cooperative must explain the meaning of consent to members
and prospective members: this reminds leaders that such an
explanation is also a tax law requirement.
ARTICLE VIII. CONSENT
Each person who hereafter applies for and is
accepted to membership in this association, and
each member of this association on the effective date
of this bylaw who continues as a member after such
date, shall, by such act alone, consent that the
amount of any distributions with respect to his
patronage occurring after the effective date of this
bylaw, which are made in qualified written notices
of allocation or qualified per-unit retain certificates
(as defined in 26 U.S.C. 1388), and which are
received by him from the cooperative, will be taken
into account by him at their stated dollar amounts in
the manner provided in 26 U.S.C. 1385(a) in the taxable year in which such written notices of allocation
and per-unit retain certificates are received by him.
Written notification of the adoption of this
Article, a statement of its significance, and a copy of
the provision shall be given separately to each member and prospective member before membership in
the association.
Nonmember Business
The bylaws should make it clear whether the association
may or may not do business with nonmembers. The sample
bylaw assumes that the association will want the option to conduct nonmember business.
41
If the association does nonmember business, the CapperVolstead Act and many State incorporation laws require that a
majority of the association business be done with or for members. The first three sentences of the sample bylaw are thus
found in most cooperative bylaws.
If an association wishes to qualify for tax treatment under
section 521 of the Internal Revenue Code, it may not do more
than 15 percent of its farm supply business with persons who
are neither members nor producers (business with the Federal
government can be disregarded in making this computation).
The last two sentences in the example cover this situation.
ARTICLE IX. NONMEMBER BUSINESS
This association may conduct business with
nonmembers on either a patronage or nonpatronage
basis. However, this association shall not market the
products of nonmembers in an amount the value of
which exceeds the value of the products marketed
for members. Itshall not purchase supplies and
equipment for nonmembers in an amount the value
of which exceeds the value of the supplies and
equipment purchased for members. It shall not purchase supplies and equipment for persons who are
neither members nor producers of agricultural products in an amount the value of which exceeds fifteen
percent (15%) of all its purchases. Business done for
the United States or any of its agencies shall be disregarded in determining the limitations imposed by
this section.
Nonpatronage Income
Several factors are combining to increase the proportion of
cooperatives that have taxable earnings from nonpatronage
sourced. These factors include a growing reliance on nonmember business to sustain the cooperative, more forceful positions
by IRS auditors to classify investment income as nonpatronage
sources, and less use of section 521. The bylaws should recog42
nize this as special income and provide the board discretion to
add it to a capital reserve, distribute it to members, or put it to
any other lawful use.
I ARTICLE X. NONPAlXONAGE INCOME
The nonpatronage income of the association
shall be its gross receipts derived from all sources
which under law do not qualify as patronage
income, less all expenses properly attributable to the
production of such nonpatronage sources income
and all income taxes payable on such receipts by the
association, Nonpatronage income shall be used in
behalf of the association and its members in accordance with such lawful purposes, including assignment to an unallocated reserve account and allocation in whole or in part to members, as may be
determined by the board of directors.
Handling of Losses
While cooperatives operate at cost over the long term, the
financial world operates for accounting and tax purposes in single-year segments. Sometimes cooperatives have a loss in that
relatively short framework. The bylaws should anticipate the
possibility of a loss year. They should explain how decisions
will be made to allocate the loss on an equitable basis.
The proper treatment of losses by cooperatives for tax purposes has long been a contentious issue between cooperatives
and the Internal Revenue Service. The sample bylaw reflects a
moderate position that financial results on patronage and nonpatronage business should be separated: gains and losses within
each category can be combined, or “netted,” for tax purposes;
and losses under either category can be carried back or forward
to offset earnings in other years under the applicable provisions
of the tax code for businesses in general. As the rules for handling losses are subject to change from time to time, counsel
should be asked to keep informed on this issue and advise the
association when this bylaw may need revision.
43
It may also be prudent to include a prohibition on directors
voting a direct assessment on the members. This will prevent
outside interests from pressuring the directors into an action
likely to have a negative impact on member relations.
ARTICLE XI. LOSSES
Section z . Patronage Losses. In the event the association suffers a loss during any year on business conducted with or for patrons, such loss may be apportioned among the patrons during the year of loss so
that such loss will, to the extent practicable, be
borne by the patrons of the loss year on an equitable
basis. The board shall have full authority to prescribe the basis on which capital furnished by
patrons may be reduced or such loss otherwise equitably apportioned among the patrons. In the event of
a patronage loss in one or more departments or divisions of the operation of this association, but not so
much as to cause an overall loss for the fiscal year,
such loss or losses may be prorated against each of
the remaining profitable departments on the basis of
their respective percentage of the net margins during
such fiscal year.
Section 2. Nonpatronage Losses. If in any fiscal year the association shall incur a loss other than
on patronage operations, such loss may be charged
against any reserve accumulated from nonpatronage
earnings in prior years.
Section 3. General Provisions. The board
shall have no authority to make assessments against
members.
This section shall not be construed to deprive
the association of the right to carry backward or forward losses from any source whatsoever in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code or state taxing
statutes.
44
Dissolution
Many of the rules to dissolve a cooperative are contained in
various statutes and are too complex to reproduce in the bylaws.
One issue that should be addressed is how any assets that might
remain after all liabilities are met should be distributed. In a
noncooperative corporation this is usually done on the basis of
stock ownership and, if the bylaws are silent on this issue, this
may be the rule imposed on cooperative members by a court. It
is a good idea to consider language in the bylaws of a cooperative making clear that such a distribution will be on the basis on
patronage.
I
ARTICLE XII. DISSOLUTION AND PROPERTY
INTEREST OF MEMBERS
Upon dissolution, after all debts and liabilities
of the association shall have been paid, all shares of
preferred stock and common stock redeemed, and all
capital furnished through patronage shall have been
retired without priority on a pro rata basis, the
remaining property and assets of the association
shall be distributed among the members and former
members in the proportion which the aggregate
patronage of each member bears to the total patronage of all such members insofar as practicable,
unless otherwise provided by law.
Indemnification
As the trend toward litigating to test the validity of various
decisions by corporate leaders has grown, so has the possibility
that directors, officers and employees may be found personally
liable for the adverse consequences of their decisions. This has
made some people understandably reluctant to assume leadership positions, particularly as unpaid or minimally compensated directors and officers.
State governments, recognizing the valuable role directors
and officers play in corporate affairs, have adopted a variety of
45
laws limiting liability of corporate leaders and permitting corporations to shield leaders from direct personal loss for decisions
they make on behalf of the corporation.
In many States this is a developing area of the law, and the
extent of permissible indemnification changes frequently. To
encourage members to serve as directors, and to make sure leaders don’t shy away from innovative ideas, cooperatives should
consider a bylaw accepting the maximum amount of responsibility for indemnification permitted by State law.
Prudent risk management usually includes the purchase of
liability insurance to protect against an indemnification claim
that might otherwise lead to significant exposure for the association. This coverage can seem quite expensive, so the sample
language uses the permissive term “may” rather than the mandatory term “shall.” But whenever possible, this insurance should
be obtained to avoid exposing member assets to unacceptable
risk.
I
ARTICLE XIII. INDl3MNIFICATION
The association shall indemnify its officers,
directors, employees, and agents to the fullest extent
possible under the provisions of the
(applicable State law), as it may be amended from
time to time.
The association may purchase liability insurance coverage for any person serving as an officer,
director, employee or agent to the extent permitted
by applicable State law.
Amendment
It is important for cooperative leaders to remember that
bylaws are not set in stone. They can, and should, be changed
whenever they stand as a barrier to cooperative activity desired
by the member-owners and permissible under the law.
While the incorporation statute will include language permitting amendment of the bylaws and setting out how this can
be accomplished, a bylaw on amendment is usually included to
46
remind leaders that change is possible and to call attention to
any unusual legal requirement, such as a higher than normal
positive voting requirement, that may be applicable.
ARTICLE XIV. AMEXWMENTS
If notice of the character of the amendment
proposed has been given in the notice of meeting,
these bylaws may be altered or amended at any regular or special meeting of the members by the affirmative vote of (_) of the members present or voting by proxy.
Again, these are only examples of the provisions common
to most cooperative bylaws. Virtually any other rule can be
included that is permissible under law. It is up to the leaders
and members of a cooperative to craft a set of bylaws that guides
the association to serving members’ needs.
MARKETING AGREEMENT
Cooperatives that market farm products and other goods of
their members will usually want a separate contract with each
member establishing the terms upon which they will conduct
their business transactions. This contract is commonly called a
marketing agreement.
If the members only want the cooperative to serve as a
home-of-last-resort for product that can’t be sold elsewhere, then
a marketing agreement is not necessary. But if the members
want an organization that will enhance the return they earn on
all of their production, then a marketing agreement is an important marketing tool.
The marketing agreement is a unique contract in that,
because the members own ,and control the cooperative, the
members are entering into a contract with themselves. But it is
more accurate to picture the agreement as a contract between
each individual member and the membership as a whole.
An important key to making the system work is for everyone to remember that the cooperative is democratically con47
trolled by the members. No individual member has a right to
unilaterally cancel or change the marketing agreement, and the
leadership should not insist on arrangements that are contrary to
the wishes of a majority of the membership.
The marketing agreement builds on the patronage commitment section of the organizational agreement. Each individual
member’s obligation to the organization committee is transferred
to the new cooperative entity.
While the basic content of the articles and bylaws is standardized throughout the cooperative community, the substantive
provisions of the marketing agreement are influenced by the custom and trade of the market for the commodity covered by the
agreement. Thus the sample language may need substantial
modification to meet member needs.
As with the articles and bylaws, the terms of the marketing
agreement are binding until changed, but they are not etched in
stone. The association-represented by its officers and directors-and the members are free to adopt an approach to any
issue different than the approach set out in the organization
agreement or in previously adopted marketing agreements.
Introduction
These initial provisions identify the parties to the contract,
the cooperative and the producer, and usually establish any
other requirements that the producer must meet, including any
initial equity investment obligation, to be a member of the cooperative.
I
MARKEUINGAGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made as of this _ day of
x9_, by and between , herein referred to as “Producer,” and
t an agricultural cooperative
having an office at
, herein referred to as “Association”.
RECITALS
A. Association is an agricultural cooperative
organized under the laws of the State of .
B. Producer is a member of the Association
who produces .
C. Producer has purchased one share of common voting stock and paid to Association the sum of
dollars ($), calculated at the rate of $
per -(unit) of (product) as specified in
Producer’s membership application, receipt of which
is acknowledged as an equity investment in the
Association. This entitles Producer to all the benefits of membership in the Association as long as
Producer complies with the articles of incorporation
and bylaws of the Association and the provisions of
this agreement.
In consideration of the mutual covenants and
obligations contained herein, the parties agree as follows:
sales Terms
This provision outlines how the association will sell the
products and pay the member-patrons. The first paragraph normally defines the obligation of the producer to deliver product
to the association. The same three options outlined in the
patronage commitment examples for the organization agreement-full production, defined volume, and set acreage-are
available for use in setting the delivery commitment once operation begins, The defined volume option is utilized in this example, so if another type of obligation is adopted, appropriate modification of the first paragraph should be made.
The second paragraph explains how the association will
distribute the proceeds of resale to the member. Two ways of
accounting for these proceeds are common. One is sometimes
referred to as a gross margin operation. The association agrees
49
to pay the member the going market price for the product, less
deductions for operating expenses. After the end of the fiscal
year, any margin is returned to the producers as a patronage
refund.
The other is called the pooling method. In this arrangement all proceeds above expenses are returned to the producers
on the basis of patronage. Such associations do not generate
margins, as such, and thus lack access to retained patronage
refunds to obtain equity.
Pooling cooperatives must rely on per-unit retains and
other means of raising capital. An example of draft language for
each option is set forth below.
Other terms of sale should also be included in the agreement. Sample language on several areas commonly covered are
provided: responsibilities for delivery and for inspection and
grading of the product; authorization for the association to pledge
the product and sales proceeds as collateral for loans and otherwise exercise the rights of ownership: authorization for the association to withhold fees to cover operating expenses and capital
retains from checks to growers; and an explanation of how the
parties to the contract will deal with liens against the product.
Section 1. Sale of (product).
Association agrees to buy and Producer agrees to sell
to Association (number) (units) of
(product) as defined by USDA standards and grown
by Producer. This agreement is intended by the parties to pass an absolute title to (number)
_ (units) of (product) grown by Producer
as soon as they have a potential existence but such
(product) shall be at the risk of Producer until delivery.
* * * * * * OPTION - Gross Margin Operation * * * * l l
Section 2. Payment to Producer. Association
shall market Producer’s (product) and
Producer shall accept as payment for Producer’s
(product) a price based on the current market price
in the area for (product) of like grade and
50
quality.
Association shall pay the amount due
Producer, less deductions authorized in Section 6 of
this agreement, not more than _ days after delivery of [product) to Association or Association’s
prescribed buying location.
l * * l l * OPTION - Pooling Operation l l * * * *
Section 2. Payment to Producer. The
Association may at any time pool any or all
(product) of Producer with any other
(product) of a similar kind and grade. Producer shall
receive, for (product) pooled, a unit price
equal to the average net unit price obtained for the
pooled (product), less deductions authorized
in Section 6 of this agreement.
Association shall make an advance payment to
Producer of percent of the current market price in
the area for (product) of like grade and quality
not more than _ days after delivery of (product) to Association or Association’s prescribed buying
location.
Section 3. Delivery. All (product) shall
be delivered by Producer at Producer’s expense at
the earliest reasonable time after harvesting, or at
such time as called for by Association, to
Association’s principal place of business or to one of
Association’s authorized buying locations as prescribed by Association. The Association will use its
best efforts to locate buying locations within a reasonable distance from Producer’s farm.
Section 4. Inspection and Grading. Prior to
acceptance by Association, all (product) shall
be inspected and graded by the USDA in accordance
with USDA standard rules and regulations.
All purchases and/or marketings of
(product) received by Association from Producer
51
shall be based upon USDA grade, and Producer
agrees to accept the grading established by USDA.
Section 5. Loans and Security. Association
shall have the power to borrow money for any purpose on the security of the (product) delivered to Association, the products derived thereupon,
and evidence of such products or by-products, or
cash or accounts arising from the sale thereof, and to
give a lien, either legal or equitable, thereon as the
absolute owner and/or marketing agent thereof.
Association may commingle such products and byproducts with other products and by-products of like
grade and variety and shall exercise all other rights
of ownership without limitation.
Section 6. Deductions. Association agrees to
purchase from and/or market for Producer the
(product) set forth in Section 1 and to pay to
Producer for said (product) the price set forth
in Section 2, less the following deductions authorized by Producer:
a. An amount to be determined annually
by the board of directors, in the sole discretion of the board, to meet the general contingencies of the business of the Association
including operating expenses.
b.A$ . per___ (unit) capital retain
deduction by the Association on the purchase
price of each _(unit) of (product)
received from Producer.
Section 7. Liens. Producer shall notify the
Association of any lien on any (product) covered by this agreement. Producer shall obtain permission from the lien holder for Association to market such (product) and to retain any
deductions from the payments to Producer autho52
rized hereunder and under the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the Association. After any such
deductions, Producer authorizes the Association to
apply the balance of the sale proceeds, or so much
thereof as necessary, for payment of the lien.
Enforcement
As a member owned and controlled entity, one of the most
sensitive areas of management and leadership in a cooperative is
the disciplining of members who violate their agreements with
the association. But unless each member honors his or her obligations to the association, the collective strength of the venture
is weakened and the entity’s chance of success is diminished.
This is especially true where a marketing agreement is in
effect. Management has to be able to anticipate the amount of
product that will be delivered so it can plan for its processing
and resale. Disruptions in anticipated delivery by natural causes, such as drought, are usually excused under a so-called “Act
of God” clause in the cooperative’s contracts with buyers. But if
members simply do not deliver product to the association as
promised, management may be forced to buy product on the
open market to meet association commitments or even default
on its own contractual obligations.
Usually a member knowingly violates the marketing agreement because the member thinks he or she can get a better price
somewhere else.
In the short term, this may indeed be the case. No firm
always has the best price in a competitive market. But a cooperative must view itself as a long-term undertaking. If some members are allowed to forsake the cooperative for personal shortterm gain, they do so at the expense of those members who
honor their agreement. Because the marketing agreement is a
contract between each individual member and the membership
as a whole, the leadership has the responsibility to protect the
interest of the group as a whole. That means taking steps,
including legal action if necessary, to enforce the marketing
agreement.
Most State cooperative incorporation statutes permit contractual provisions to facilitate enforcement of marketing agree53
ments. One is the inclusion of language providing for liquidated
damages. In general corporate law, an injured party must prove
the extent of the loss with great specificity to be eligible for compensation. This can be very difficult to do when agricultural commodities are involved. Their value changes by the day, or even by
the minute. So in this instance, the parties can agree through contract on a specific level of damages, called liquidated damages,
that will be the penalty for violating the contract. The level must
be high enough to truly discourage breaches of the contract and to
compensate the other members for their loss. A frequently used
rule-of-thumb is 25 percent of the estimated market value of the
commodity if it had been delivered under the contract.
Marketing agreements also usually authorize the association to go to court and seek a restraining order against either
actual or anticipated breach of the contract.
The agreement may also make the offending party liable for
legal fees incurred by the association in defending the agreement.
Section 8. Liquidated Damages. The remedy
at law would be inadequate and it would be impracticable and difficult to determine the actual damages
to the Association should Producer fail to deliver the
(product] covered by this agreement. Therefore,
regardless of the cause of such failure, Producer
agrees to pay to the Association for all such
(product) delivered or disposed of by Producer, other
than in accordance with the terms of this agreement,
a sum equal to _ % of the fair market value of the
product at the close of business on the day the product should have been delivered to the Association,
as liquidated damages for the breach of this agreement.
All parties agree that this agreement is one of
a series dependent for its true value on the adherence of all the contracting parties to all of the agreements, but the cancellation of any other similar
agreement or the failure of any of the parties thereto
to comply therewith shall not affect the validity of
this agreement.
Failure to deliver the (product) commit54
ted herein due to ACTS OF GOD shall not constitute
a breach of this agreement.
Section 9. Specific Performance. Producer
agrees that in the event of a breach or threatened
breach by Producer of any provisions of this marketing agreement regarding delivery of (pmduct),
the Association shall be entitled to a preliminary
restraining order and an injunction to prevent breach
or further breach hereof and to a decree of specific
performance hereof. The parties agree that this is a
contract for the purchase and sale of personal property under special circumstances and conditions and
that the Association may, but shall not be obligated
to, go into the open markets and buy -(product)
to replace any that Producer may fail to deliver.
Section 20. Legal Costs and Expenses. If the
Association brings any action whatsoever by reason
of a breach or threatened breach of this agreement,
Producer shall pay to the Association all court costs,
costs for bonds, travel expenses and all other
expenses arising out of or caused by the litigation,
including reasonable attorney’s fees expended or
incurred by Association in such proceedings, and all
such costs and expenses shall be included in the
judgment.
Termination and Renewal
Management doesn’t want to have to get every member to
sign a new agreement each year, and the producers aren’t going
to want to be obligated to continue to patronize the cooperative
if it isn’t meeting their needs. A provision providing that the
contract automatically renews itself for another year unless
either the cooperative or the member provides notice during a
specific period of time-usually about a month during a slow
period in production and cooperative activity-that it wants to
terminate the agreement gives adequate flexibility and stability
to the relationship.
55
Section 2 1. Termination and Renewal. After
this agreement has been in effect one year from the
date of execution, either party may terminate it in
any year by notifying the other party in writing
between (date) and (date). It is mutually agreed that failure to so terminate in any year
shall constitute conclusive evidence that the parties
have renewed this agreement for another year.
Miscellaneous Provisions
Individual cooperatives have adopted numerous additional
provisions to tailor their marketing agreements to their individual needs. Examples of some of the more common, but by no
means all, of these types of provisions are provided.
Nonconforming agreements. From time to time, the association may want to alter the terms of its marketing agreement.
This may occur when numerous agreements are in effect, and it
is a good cooperative practice to treat all member equitably.
Therefore, a provision permitting nonconforming contracts, but
offering persons with ongoing agreements the option to change
to the new agreement, often called a “most favored nation
clause,” can be useful. If the association wants to bring all
agreements back to uniformity, it can do so during the next time
period for terminating existing agreements.
Section 12. Nonconforming Agreements.
Association may enter into agreements with other
growers differing in terms from those contained herein, consistent with the bylaws of the Association,
without invalidating this agreement, provided that
Producer at Producer’s request may sign a similar
agreement as a substitute for this agreement.
No contrary agreements. One of the most difficult legal situations to untangle involves the member who signs more than
one contract for the sale of the same commodity. A clause forbidding such activity helps place the responsibility for injuries
suffered by the cooperative on the member.
Section 13. No Contrary Agreements. Producer warrants that Producer has not contracted to sell, market, consign, or deliver and will not contract to sell,
market, consign, or deliver any (product) during the term of this agreement to any person, firm or
corporation, contrary to this agreement.
Forfeiture of membership. If a member is going to disregard the terms of the marketing agreement, the cooperative is
usually better off without that person as a member. A provision
giving the board authority to revoke the membership of a member who violates the agreement gives appropriate discretion to
the directors in dealing with a breach of the contract.
Section 14. Forfeiture of Membership.
Violation of this agreement in any material respect
by Producer shall be grounds for the board of directors to terminate Producer’s membership in the
Association.
Abide by articles and bylaws. A similar provision requiring members to abide by the articles and bylaws, as written at
the time the agreement is signed or subsequently a&nded,
makes it clear that a member can’t abrogate the agreement if the
membership approves a change in the cooperative organizational documents the individual member doesn’t like. That member
must honor the agreement until the annual period for orderly
termination arrives.
I
Section 15. Articles and Bylaws. Producer
agrees to conform to and observe the articles of
incorporation and bylaws of the Association now in
force and as they may be amended hereafter.
Assignment. Sometimes reorganizations occur during the
year at either the association or the member level. The right of a
new entity replacing one of the parties to enforce the contract
can be clarified in the agreement itself. Because the association
is the members as a whole, it can usually assign its rights at will.
However, to protect against one member assigning rights to an
5 7
unqualified person, usually a member must have board approval
to assign contract rights.
Section 26. Assignment. This agreement may
be assigned by the Association in its sole discretion.
Producer may assign this agreement, but only upon
written authorization granted by the board of directors of the Association.
Entire agreement. A major cause of disputes over business
contracts is the unwritten exception. One party to the contract
will say, “I know the contract says that, but you told me you
would do this.”
Marketing agreements will frequently include language
stating that the organizational documents and the agreement
itself are the only contracts between the parties and no oral or
other types of agreements will be honored. The manager, in particular, needs to be reminded of this rule. Special unauthorized
promises or “deals” for selected members can do serious harm to
the cohesiveness of the association.
~ Section 17. Entire Agreement. It is agreed that
the articles of incorporation and the bylaws of the
Association, now or hereafter in effect, and this marketing agreement constitute the entire agreement
between the Association and Producer, and that there
are no oral or other conditions, promises, covenants,
representations, or inducements in addition to, or at
variance with, any terms of this agreement.
Governing law. Even if an association intends to limit its
activity to a single State, disputes that involve the marketing
agreement can arise from transactions that cross State lines in
any number of ways. To avoid arguments over which State’s law
shall be applied, the contract might have a clause naming the
State. This can be particularly important if the association is
incorporated under a statute of a State different from the one
where its headquarters are located.
I
Section 18. Governing Law.
This agreement shall be governed by the laws of the
State of ,
Signatures. To make the contracts official, they must be
signed by both parties. If the producer is a business and not a
real person, the association should check to make sure the
signee for the business is authorized to enter into such agreements for the business.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, these parties have executed
this agreement as of the day, month and year first
above written:
Producer
(Cooperative name)
BY
President
ATTEST
I Secretary
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION
When a person applies for membership in a cooperative, it
is a good idea to have a simple document that ties the loose ends
together and, when approved, serves as official notice that the
applicant is a bona fide member of the association. If the articles, bylaws, and marketing agreement are well drafted, this
need be little more than a summary of the commitments made.
Applicant certifies that the requirements of membership have
been met, and the appropriate cooperative officers, usually the
president and secretary, acknowledge board approval of the
applicant.
5 9
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION
Applicant’s Statement. I hereby apply for membership in and agree to
abide by the articles of incorporation and bylaws of
the association, now and hereafter in effect, copies of
which have been presented to me for inspection. I
certify that I am a producer of , have tendered the purchase price of one share of common
voting stock, have signed a marketing agreement,
and met such other qualifications for membership as
have been explained to me.
After my membership shall have been in
effect for one year from the date of its acceptance by
the association, either party may terminate it by notifying the other party in writing of this intention
between (date) and (date) of any
year. If neither of the parties to this agreement so
notifies the other, it is mutually agreed that this shall
constitute conclusive evidence that the parties have
renewed this agreement for another year.
Date ,199_.
Applicant’s: name
address
telephone number
social security number
Applicant’s signature
Acceptance. This certifies that
is a member of and is
entitled to all of the rights, benefits, and privileges of
membership in the association.
Date , 199_.
President:
Secretary:
As mentioned earlier, familiarity with the documents
reviewed in this report is an ongoing responsibility of each
cooperative leader, particularly members of the board of directors. The same is true for other important cooperative papers:
e.g., audit reports and current financial statements, board policies, loan agreements, the manager’s job description, and minutes of board and membership meetings.
As the manager’s job is to run the day-to-day operations of
the cooperative, the manager acquires the necessary familiarity
with these items as part of his or her ongoing duties.
Directors usually don’t have the continuous contact with
the business that the manager does. They need to have the documents available so they can look up information and ask
informed questions when necessary. A good director handbook
meets this need.
The director handbook can be nothing more than a solid
three-ring binder that contains up-to-date copies of all documents the directors need to set cooperative policy. Every new
director should get a current handbook as soon as he or she is
elected to the board. At each board meeting the manager or the
president should distribute minutes of the previous meeting and
new versions of any documents that have been modified or
adopted since the last meeting. Time should be taken to make
sure the directors place the new pages in the proper place in the
book and to let the directors review and ask questions about the
additions and replacements.
The director handbook will get the important cooperative
papers out of the file cabinet and into the mainstream of the
decision-making process. It will minimize the likelihood leaders will innocently violate a provision of the articles and bylaws,
contracts, or other written guidelines. It will provide ready
answers to questions about the limitations on managerial discretion imposed by these documents. And it will facilitate the conduct of business meetings in a professional and efficient manner.
In summary, it will soon become a valuable tool for cooperative
management and planning.
61
Appendix A. Election of Directors
by Districts (bylaw provision)
ARTICLE III. DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
Section 2. Election of Directors by Districts.
(Two paragraphs as in sample language on page 29,
main text. Next, add the following:)
The territory in which the association has
members shall be divided into _ (same number as
number of directors) districts. The respective districts and their boundaries shall be established by
resolution of the board of directors.
The board of directors may from time to time
change the boundaries of one or more districts by
adding territory not included within any district, by
adding to one district territory previously included
in another district, or by excluding from a district a
part of its territory.
There shall be as many directors as there are
districts, one director to be elected by the members
of each district. However, when the number of districts is an even number, there shall be one additional director to be known as a director-at-large and to
be elected by all members of the association. A district director must be a resident of, or be a producer
of agricultural products in, the district for which
such director is elected or appointed.
Any questions as to the effect of any changes
made in district boundaries, or the number or identity or districts, shall be conclusively determined by
the board of directors.
Nominations for directors, either for a district
or at large, shall be made by petition addressed to
the secretary of the association requesting placement
on the ballot of the name of the person so nominated. Such a petition nominating a district director
shall be signed by not less than _ members of that
district. Such a petition nominating a director-atlarge shall be signed by not less than _ members of
the association.
62
Appendix B. Equity Redemption
(alternative bylaw)
ARTICLE VII. EQUITY REDEMPTION
Section I. Regular Redemption, Percent of
All Equities. It shall be the policy of the association,
when other redemption priorities set forth herein
have been met, and when funds are available, to
redeem in cash a percentage of each member
patron’s capital credits, rather than ratably by year.
The time and method of any such redemption shall
be determined by the board of directors.
Section 2. Specified Special Redemptions.
The association shall give priority to redemption of
members’ capital credits held by deceased persons
for the settlement of their estate. The association
shall thereafter grant priority redemption to capital
credits of former members who have attained their
65th birthday and are no longer actively engaged in
agricultural production as actual producers or landlords in share tenancy. The time and method of
such redemption shall be determined solely by the
board of directors, dependent upon the financial
condition of the association. In the case of redemption of the equities of those persons who have
attained age 65 and retired from farming, preference
may be given to the oldest retirees in establishing the
order of priority among those eligible.
In the case of a corporation or partnership
holder of members’ capital credits, such corporation
or partnership shall be considered eligible for priority treatment to the same extent as the individual
stockholders of such corporation or partners of the
partnership would have qualified, if each individual
stockholder or partner were an individual memberpatron of this association. Any redemption shall be
made to the corporation or partnership, and not to
the individual stockholder or partner thereof.
Each corporation or partnership shall report to
the association the percentage of ownership interest
63
in the corporation or partnership of each of its stockholders or partners. Failure to report accurately the
percentage of individual ownership interest shall
disqualify any allocations made to the corporation or
partnership by this association from redemption priority. If a corporation or partnership should dissolve, its capital credits in this association shall be
prorated among, and transferred to, the individual
stockholders or partners and considered for redemp
tion on an individual ownership basis. The amount
of any redemption or prorate related to a corporate
or partnership member shall be determined by the
percentage of ownership interest as reported by the
corporation or partnership.
When two or more persons are holders of capital credits as tenants in common, without a designation of rights of survivorship, they shall be deemed
by this association to be acting as partners and shall
be subject to the same requirements as a partnership.
Capital credits held in joint tenancy with
rights of survivorship shall be considered for priority
of redemption according to the qualifying status of
the youngest member of the joint tenancy or, in the
event of death of one of the joint tenants, of the survivor.
Appendix C. Base Capital Plan
(bylaw provision)
ARTICLE VII. EQUITY REDEMPTION
Section 1. Members’ Equity Requirements.
Each year the board of directors shall determine the
amount of equity capital necessary for successful
operation of the cooperative.
The total amount of member volume and the
volume each member has marketed through the association during the past _( ) years shall be calculated.
Each member’s equity requirement is equal to
the amount of equity, determined necessary by the
board of directors, multiplied by the member’s proportion of the association’s total member volume
during the base _ year period.
Section 2. Member Investment. Members can
invest equity to meet their requirements by direct
cash investment, allocated patronage refunds, and
per-unit capital retains.
Section 3. Member Account Adjustments. At
the end of each fiscal year the association shall recalculate each member’s capital credits account to
include all per-unit retains for the year and each
member’s share of patronage refunds for the year.
(a) If a member’s total capital credits are less
than the member’s equity requirement for that year,
cash returns on business done with the association
will be limited to those required by the Internal
Revenue Code or other applicable law.
(b) If the member’s capital credits, less any
cash that must be refunded to comply with the
Internal Revenue Code or other applicable law, are
greater than the member’s equity requirement for
that year, the excess shall be redeemed in cash within g-112 months after the close of the association’s
fiscal year.
65
