**Merchandising Gude**

Module 1: The Importance of Merchandising

Merchandising, or how products are displayed in the store, plays a critical role in the overall success of your business.
After all, when customers come into your store, you want them to buy. Effective merchandising is a tool that gets them
closer to that purchase decision.
But having effective merchandising demands discipline and planning. It’s hard work. You must pay attention to detail on a
daily basis. You also must realize that many of your competitors have effective merchandising. That means your customers
are used to seeing it, so they expect it from you, too.
In this course, we’ll discuss the techniques and best practices that make up an effective merchandising strategy. We’ll begin
by talking about why merchandising is so important.
Merchandising makes several important contributions to your store. It increases sales by making a store appealing to your
customers. It improves profitability by generating more margin dollars. It controls costs by improving the productivity of the
salesfloor as well as each employee.
Appeals to Customers
•	 Good merchandising makes shopping easier for customers and gives them reasons to come back
often and spend more money. Remember that many consumers may not consider shopping fun.
A merchandiser’s goal is to take the hassle out of shopping and make it easier.
•	 Good merchandising can also create customer loyalty. Consumers shop where they feel certain they
can find the merchandise they want. They will be loyal to your store if you can create a pleasing
shopping experience and provide what they need.
•	 Finally, good merchandising can promote repeat shopping. One of the best opportunities for growth
comes from building on the business of existing shoppers. When customers know your store is
easy to shop, they will return again and again.
Improves Profitability
•	 One way good merchandising can improve your store’s profitability is by enhancing your price
image. Many consumers may think that independent home improvement retailers have high prices.
The challenge for those retailers, then, is not to have the lowest prices, but to convince consumers
that they are priced competitively for the value and service they offer. Pallet displays in the power
aisle are a good example of how to promote a value-priced image.
•	 Merchandising also allows retailers to make strategic pricing decisions. Through promotional
merchandising techniques, such as dump bins, it’s possible to increase item sales while at the
same time lowering prices.
•	 Merchandising can increase your sales per customer if it’s arranged to promote add-on sales, for example,
through impulse displays at the checkout counter.
•	 Merchandising also promotes self-service shopping. While you can only wait on one customer at a
time, good displays help customers shop on their own. This means you have more time to spend
with customers who need extra help.

Module 1: The Importance of Merchandising (continued)
Increases Salesfloor Productivity
•	 Merchandising can help control costs by helping retailers improve the productivity of the salesfloor.
Productivity improves when retailers can increase sales using their existing salesfloor square
footage and number of employees. Merchandising affects virtually all of the measurements of retail
productivity, such as gross margin and sales per square foot.
•	 Merchandising also makes the salesfloor more productive by suggesting add-on sales and impulse
purchases. It helps organize the store, suggest project ideas, remind customers of items they may
have forgotten and promote special buys.
•	 Merchandising also complements advertising by helping customers find sale items.
Increases Employee Productivity
•	 Good merchandising can help increase your productivity by helping you provide better customer
service. As an employee, you want to spend your time giving customers the product knowledge
they need to solve their home improvement problems. You want to minimize the time you spend
simply directing customers to the aisles where they can find what they need. That’s why you have
signage and merchandising.
•	 Good merchandising makes selling more rewarding. The more customers are able to shop for
themselves, the more time you have to develop new retailing skills. This will help you advance and
gain new responsibilities in the company
Module 2: The Elements of Merchandising
There’s more to merchandising than just having attractive displays. It incorporates the design of the salesfloor, the placement of the
signage and the presentation of the products. When you learn how to merchandise, you learn how to effectively use space, color
and lighting to encourage customers to buy. A well-merchandised store is also a well-organized store. Customers like organized
stores because they can find merchandise quickly and easily on their own. All of the elements of merchandising contribute to
making a store more organized. In this module, we’ll discuss eight elements of merchandising: salesfloor layout, interior signage, cross
merchandising, the use of space, color, lighting, mass displays and interactive technology.
Racetrack Layout
The racetrack layout, also called a loop layout, has the main traffic aisle circling the salesfloor. It gives every major
department exposure on the main aisle. It moves customers through the store and lets them see merchandise in
more departments. It also provides more locations for endcaps, which helps create a value-priced image.
Diagonal Layout
The diagonal layout is a modification of the racetrack layout and can be effective in smaller stores. It
creates several triangular areas in the store and pulls customers to corners they might otherwise miss.
Grid Layout
The grid layout is the simple, traditional layout for a home improvement store. It has straight cross aisles
leading off one or more main aisles into departments. This layout is neat and makes good use of space. Its
main drawback is that is does not put the maximum amount of product in front of customers.
Power Aisle
The power aisle design works well for smaller salesfloors where a racetrack is not practical. It is a
double-width aisle that runs the full length of the store.
This design often includes departmental cross aisles that feed off of the power aisle. The power aisle
gives exposure to most major departments through the use of feature endcaps or promotional mass
displays in the center of the aisle. It makes maximum use of the display area.
Module 2: The Elements of Merchandising
Salesfloor Layout
Most stores are organized into departments, and customers are accustomed to shopping this way. Here are five ways the salesfloor
can be laid out in a typical store.
Project Centers
Project centers and demonstration areas can be developed with any salesfloor layout. They can be used
for classes, workshops or product demonstrations. They are also useful areas for collection points for
how-to information, such as books and product information.
These areas should present products related to projects and focus attention on promoted merchandise.
Signage should suggest projects, explain product features and benefits, talk about prices and highlight
the value of home improvement projects.
Cube Displays
Cube displays are another way smaller stores can get the maximum amount of merchandise on the
salesfloor. These displays use higher fixtures with careful attention to the kinds of merchandise displayed
on higher shelves. An effective way to use cube displays is to put the higher fixtures in the back of the
store to make more merchandise visible from the front and lead customers through the store.

Module 2: The Elements of Merchandising (continued)
 Brought to you by the North American Retail Hardware Association • www.nrha.org
Interior Signing
•	 Signage is an important part of merchandising because it makes shopping easier for customers and
gives them the information to make informed buying decisions.
•	 Signs keep customers in the store longer, move them from department to department and suggest
more items to purchase. In addition to department and aisle signs, shelf and product signs can
convey shopping information.
•	 Some signs provide information about specific products. Signs may also be used to describe
the product’s features, benefits and uses. They should always be neat, easy to read, informative
and compelling.
•	 Signs are also used to provide information about price. They can create urgency if they are used to
identify items as bargains or closeouts. They can also identify advertised items and help establish a
value price image for the store.
•	 Department signs are used to help identify the location of departments in the store, such as paint
or tools. These signs should be visible from the front of the store so customers can quickly find
what they need.
Store Design and Product Presentation
In addition to the layout of the salesfloor, here are some elements of merchandising you may encounter in the store.
Cross Merchandising
•	 Cross merchandising is a term used to describe the placement of products together that are used
together in projects. It is an effective way to show related items that are normally stocked in
different departments. For example, you might show garden gloves next to the shovels. You can
merchandise these items next to each other on the same shelf or across the aisle. Cross-aisle
merchandising is the practice of displaying related merchandise on facing shelves.
•	 Cross merchandising is an effective technique because it makes shopping easier and more
convenient when customers can see several items they need in one location.
•	 This appeals to a customer’s desire to save time because they don’t have to go to multiple areas of
the store to get what they need.
•	 It’s also an effective tool suggesting add-on sales, since related items are together.
•	 Cross merchandising organizes products in the way they are used. In this way, it gives customers
project information. It can also suggest better-quality items.
•	 Here are some ways you can effectively use cross merchandising:
•	 Combine products from different departments.
•	 Promote seasonal projects.
•	 Promote common household repair and maintenance projects.
•	 Display the pairs in the department where customers are most likely to go first.
•	 Look for vendor planograms that utilize cross-merchandising.
•	 Incorporate signage to compare benefits of good-better-best quality.

Use of Space
•	 Merchandising should organize products in the most productive use of the space. Shelves should
be far enough apart that the merchandise fits comfortably, but not waste space. In the same way,
hooks and bins should fit the size of the item. Long- and short-handled items should go together.
•	 The use of space in merchandising also involves placement in the store. Reserve the prime display areas
in the store for items customers are most likely to want. Keep the best display area for high-demand,
fast-moving products. Putting slow movers in prime display spaces won’t make them sell faster. It may
only suggest to customers that they may have to go somewhere else to find what they need.

