PS5 Pro Reveal Breaks Unfortunate Record for Sony
 4
 By 
 Raul Landaverde
 Published 2 days ago
 Thread
 3
 Follow
 Share
 Link copied to clipboard
 PlayStation 5 Pro
 Related
 Spider-Man and Aloy with PS5 Pro
 All Games Confirmed to Be Getting PS5 Pro Upgrades
 ps5 pro pre-order exclusive to playstation direct
 PS5 Pro Pre-Orders Come With a Catch
 ps5 pro inflation comparison
 PS5 Pro Price Compared to Past PlayStation Consoles When Adjusted for Inflation
 Sign in to your Game Rant account
 PS5 Pro reveal breaks a record for Sony
 Key Takeaways
 The PS5 Pro reveals video received over 141,000 dislikes in a single day, an unfortunate new record for Sony.
 The PS5 Pro has been met with outrage over its pricing, especially in the US, UK, and EU.
 Despite skepticism, analysts expect the PS5 Pro to sell better than expected once it launches in November.
 

 The PlayStation 5 Pro reveal set an unfortunate new record for Sony as the most disliked console reveal in the company's history on YouTube. As made clear on social media, many gamers are frustrated about the price of the PS5 Pro, which can exceed over $800 in certain cases.
 

 The PS5 Pro releases on November 7 as a disc-less console that offers a 45% boost in rendering power over the base PS5. The lead architect for the PS5, Mark Cerny, stated that the console is capable of running games at 60 frames per second with the visual fidelity that players can expect from a Graphics Mode, without needing to toggle a Performance Mode. This is thanks to the PS5 Pro's upgraded GPU, which features 67% more compute units compared to the PS5's GPU. The console's advanced ray tracing capabilities can double and triple the speeds of the current PS5, and the new AI-driven upscaling feature, PlayStation Spectral Super Resolution, ensures that performance and visual clarity is maintained with ray tracing effects. However, the steep $699.99 price point and lack of an included vertical stand or disc drive are making the PS5 Pro a hard sell for many gamers, and they've made their disappointment known on the YouTube video for the PS5 Pro reveal.
 

 

 Spider-Man and Aloy with PS5 Pro
 Related
 All Games Confirmed to Be Getting PS5 Pro Upgrades
 Sony has already confirmed over a dozen games that will be receiving the PS5 Pro enhancement treatment, and there are still dozens more to come.
 

 The PS5 Pro technical presentation is Sony's most disliked console reveal on YouTube with well over 141,000 dislikes in just a day, according to Push Square. There are over 93,000 likes on the PS5 Pro reveal video, which highlights a clear split in the gaming community's sentiment toward the new console. When compared to the 69,000 dislikes accrued over the four years following the original PS5 console's reveal, the PS5 Pro received more than doubled the amount of dislikes in record time.
 

 PS5 Pro is the Most Disliked Console in Sony's History on YouTube
 

 The PS5 Pro reveal video received over 141,000 dislikes in a day.
 

 The backlash is especially prevalent in the video's comments, with many fans being outraged at the pricing of the PS5 Pro in the US, UK, and EU especially. For example, YouTube users in the EU are confused and angered by Sony's decision to price the PS5 Pro at €799.99 (roughly $881), which is $180 more than US gamers would need to pay for the console at $699.99 (roughly €635).
 

 Analysts believe the PS5 Pro will sell better than expected, despite skepticism from tens of thousands of gamers online. The PS5 Pro was always meant to be a niche product by Sony that caters to PlayStation enthusiasts, but it's clear that many gamers believe the console's performance and visual upgrades are not enough to warrant the $699.99 price. The lack of new game announcements that highlight the PS5 Pro's improvements did not help, either.