Participation in restorative justice programs is voluntary. As a result, offenders
often comply with restitution agreements when they have followed a restorative justice
program (Van Hecke & Wemmers, 1992). Offenders who do not accept their
responsibility and who are not open to the idea of reparation will not enter a program.
Thus, once admitted into a restorative justice program, offenders are prone to accept
responsibility for their behaviour and repair the harm caused to the victim and, as a result,
the victims of these offenders are likely to receive reparation. In their meta-analysis,
Umbreit, Coates and Vos (2001) found that 90% of cases that are addressed through
mediation end in an agreement. In most cases, these agreements consisted of a monetary
sum, community service, or services rendered directly to the victim, and around 80-90%
of the agreements were respected. 
Several researchers studying restorative justice have also observed a very high
rate of satisfaction among participants in victim-offender mediation who frequently
perceive the process and the result as fair (Umbreit, Coates & Vos 2001; Wemmers &
Canuto 2002; Strang 2002; Wemmers & Cyr 2005; Van Camp 2016). According to
Carriere, Malsch, Vermunt and De Keijser (1998), victims are generally more satisfied
with restitution when they suffer less psychological damages and when their damages are
primarily material. In contrast, other researchers find that restorative justice is
particularly satisfying for victims of serious violent crimes and that when these victims
participate in restorative justice programs they are usually satisfied with mediation, and
the restorative justice process often has a positive impact on their well-being (Strang 
20
2002; Strang et al 2006; Van Camp 2015; Wemmers 2016). Besides financial needs,
other needs often expressed by victims of crime are the need for recognition and
validation (Wemmers, 2017). Victims of serious violent crime generally seek other forms
of reparation besides compensation, such as recognition of the wrong done by the
offender, which is often very important to the victims (Van Camp & Wemmers 2015;
Van Camp 2016).  In restorative justice, victims’ needs are important and reparation aims
to address the consequences of victimization (Wemmers, 2014; 2017). As such,
restorative justice is more flexible than restitution orders and, for this reason, it is better
able to adapt to the specific needs of the victim. 
Restitution is an integral part of victim reparation, and its necessity is well
recognized by the UN as well as in the Canadian Victims’ Bill of Rights. In Canada, the
Criminal Code highlights restitution orders and their application. However, before the
introduction of the Victims’ Bill of Rights, restitution orders were a seldom-used measure
in the Canadian criminal justice system: Only 2.3% of cases where the offender was
found guilty included a restitution order. In order to encourage and facilitate requests by
victims for restitution, a standard form was introduced in 2015.
Restitution includes numerous advantages, but also has important limitations. It
lessens the consequences of the crime for the victim, can reinstate their confidence in the
criminal justice system, and can increase denunciation (Hoskins, Care & Ruback, 2015).
Nevertheless, Canadian criminal law gives priority to the offender’s rehabilitation and
social reintegration. As such, the needs of the victim are secondary.
An important obstacle observed across the different models presented, is the
conflict between criminal law and civil law. This legal distinction makes it so that judges
are often reluctant to issue a restitution order and, if they do so, damages must be easy to
determine, which leads to the inapplicability of restitution for emotional or psychological
injury. Although lawyers place great importance on this distinction, it is perceived by
victims as artificial and is often misunderstood (Helby, Van Dongen & Lindenberg,
2014). 
Even if restitution is ordered by a criminal court, it is the offender’s civil
obligation. The restitution order as well as the civil party pose difficulties for victims
with regards to the collection of their money. Civil law is complex and victims lack
information on the procedures to undertake in order to obtain restitution. We have seen
that the state can implement services to facilitate the collection of restitution. For
example, the state can treat the order as a fine and take responsibility for its collection.
The state can even advance money to the victim and then use subrogation in order to
recover the money from the offender. Studies are nevertheless necessary to evaluate the
effects of these types of services on victims and their impact on the effectiveness of
restitution.
Victim reparation is wider than restitution. Restorative justice programs do not
suffer from the same limitations as restitution orders. They give an important place to the
victim and can recognize all their needs including recognition, validation, as well as their
financial needs. Hence, they are not limited by the offender’s financial insolvency.
Restitution remains, after all, a right clearly defined in the Canadian Victims’ Bill
of Rights, and significant effort must be deployed in order to ensure its effective
application. The information presented in this article clearly points to a lack of data on
the implementation and effectiveness of restitution orders. It also highlights the necessity
to give more attention to the needs of victims of crime, as well as address the obstacles
that hinder the satisfaction of victims’ needs, in order to maximize the benefits of this
penal measure for victims, offenders and society as a whole. 