What is Lupus?
Lupus is a chronic, autoimmune disease that can damage any part of the body (skin,
joints, and/or organs inside the body). Chronic means that the signs and symptoms
tend to last longer than six weeks and often for many years. In lupus, something
goes wrong with the immune system, which is the part of the body that fights off
viruses, bacteria, and germs ("foreign invaders," like the flu). Normally our immune
system produces proteins called antibodies that protect the body from these
invaders. Autoimmune means the immune system cannot tell the difference between
these foreign invaders and the body’s healthy tissues ("auto" means "self") and
creates autoantibodies that attack and destroy healthy tissue. These autoantibodies
cause inflammation, pain, and damage in various parts of the body.
 Lupus is also a disease of flares (the symptoms worsen and the patient feels
ill) and remissions (the symptoms improve and the patient feels better). Lupus
can range from mild to life-threatening and should always be treated by a
doctor. With good medical care, most people with lupus can lead a full life.
 Lupus is not contagious, not even through sexual contact. You cannot "catch"
lupus from someone or "give" lupus to someone.
 Lupus is not like or related to cancer. Cancer is a condition of malignant,
abnormal tissues that grow rapidly and spread into surrounding tissues.
Lupus is an autoimmune disease, as described above.
 Lupus is not like or related to HIV (Human Immune Deficiency Virus) or AIDS
(Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome). In HIV or AIDS the immune system is
underactive; in lupus, the immune system is overactive.
 It is estimated that at least 1.5 million Americans have lupus. The actual
number may be higher; however, there have been no large-scale studies to
show the actual number of people in the U.S. living with lupus.
 It is believed that 5 million people throughout the world have a form of lupus. 
Lupus Information Sheet (continued)
 Lupus strikes mostly women of childbearing age (15-44). However, men,
children, and teenagers develop lupus, too.
 Women of color are 2-3 times more likely to develop lupus.
 People of all races and ethnic groups can develop lupus.
 More than 16,000 new cases of lupus are reported annually across the
country.
What causes Lupus?
Genes
No gene or group of genes has been proven to cause lupus. Lupus does, however,
appear in certain families, and when one of two identical twins has lupus, there is
an increased chance that the other twin will also develop the disease. These
findings, as well as others, strongly suggest that genes are involved in the
development of lupus. Although lupus can develop in people with no family history
of lupus, there are likely to be other autoimmune diseases in some family members.
Certain ethnic groups (people of African, Asian, Hispanic/Latino, Native American,
Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Island descent) have a greater risk of developing lupus,
which may be related to genes they have in common.
Environment
While a person’s genes may increase the chance that he or she will develop lupus, it
takes some kind of environmental trigger to set off the illness or to bring on a flare.
Examples include:
 ultraviolet rays from the sun
 ultraviolet rays from fluorescent light bulbs
 sulfa drugs, which make a person more sensitive to the sun, such as: Bactrim®
and Septra® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole); sulfisoxazole (Gantrisin®);
tolbutamide (Orinase®); sulfasalazine (Azulfidine®); diuretics
 sun-sensitizing tetracycline drugs such as minocycline (Minocin®)
 penicillin or other antibiotic drugs such as: amoxicillin (Amoxil®); ampicillin
(Ampicillin Sodium ADD-Vantage®); cloxacillin (Cloxapen®)
 an infection
 a cold or a viral illness
 exhaustion
 an injury
Lupus Information Sheet Ver3.0 – July 2013 Page - 2 
Lupus Information Sheet (continued)
 emotional stress, such as a divorce, illness, death in the family, or other life
complications
 anything that causes stress to the body, such as surgery, physical harm,
pregnancy, or giving birth
Although many seemingly unrelated factors can trigger the onset of lupus in a
susceptible person, scientists have noted some common features among many
people who have lupus, including:
 exposure to the sun
 an infection
 being pregnant
 giving birth
 a drug taken to treat an illness
However, many people cannot remember or identify any specific factor that
occurred before they were diagnosed with lupus.
Hormones
Hormones are the body’s messengers and they regulate many of the body’s
functions. In particular, the sex hormone estrogen plays a role in lupus. Men and
women both produce estrogen, but estrogen production is much greater in females.
Many women have more lupus symptoms before menstrual periods and/or during
pregnancy, when estrogen production is high. This may indicate that estrogen
somehow regulates the severity of lupus. However, it does not mean that estrogen,
or any other hormone for that matter, causes lupus.
Types of Lupus?
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Systemic lupus is the most common form of lupus,
and is what most people mean when they refer to "lupus." Systemic lupus can be
mild or severe. Some of the more serious complications involving major organ
systems are:
 inflammation of the kidneys (lupus nephritis), which can affect the body’s
ability to filter waste from the blood and can be so damaging that dialysis
or kidney transplant may be needed
 an increase in blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension)
Lupus Information Sheet Ver3.0 – July 2013 Page - 3 
Lupus Information Sheet (continued)
 inflammation of the nervous system and brain, which can cause memory
problems, confusion, headaches, and strokes
 inflammation in the brain’s blood vessels, which can cause high fevers,
seizures, behavioral changes,
 hardening of the arteries (coronary artery disease), which is a buildup of
deposits on coronary artery walls that can lead to a heart attack
Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus. Cutaneous refers to the skin, and this form of
lupus is limited to the skin. Although there are many types of rashes and lesions
(sores) caused by cutaneous lupus, the most common rash is raised, scaly and red,
but not itchy. It is commonly known as a discoid rash, because the areas of rash are
shaped like disks, or circles. Another common example of cutaneous lupus is a rash
over the cheeks and across the bridge of the nose, known as the butterfly rash.
Other rashes or sores may appear on the face, neck, or scalp (areas of the skin that
are exposed to sunlight or fluorescent light), or in the mouth, nose, or vagina. Hair
loss and changes in the pigment, or color, of the skin are also symptoms of
cutaneous lupus.
Approximately 10 percent of people who have cutaneous lupus will develop
systemic lupus. However, it is likely that these people already had systemic lupus,
with the skin rash as their main symptom.
Drug-induced Lupus Erythematosus. Drug-induced lupus is a lupus-like disease
caused by certain prescription drugs. The symptoms of drug-induced lupus are
similar to those of systemic lupus, but only rarely will any major organs be affected.
The drugs most commonly connected with drug-induced lupus are hydralazine (used
to treat high blood pressure or hypertension), procainamide (used to treat irregular
heart rhythms), and isoniazid (used to treat tuberculosis). Drug-induced lupus is more
common in men because they are given these drugs more often; however, not
everyone who takes these drugs will develop drug-induced lupus. The lupus-like
symptoms usually disappear within six months after these medications are stopped.
Neonatal Lupus. Neonatal lupus is a rare condition that affects infants of women
who have lupus and is caused by antibodies from the mother acting upon the infant
in the womb. At birth, the infant may have a skin rash, liver problems, or low blood
cell counts, but these symptoms disappear completely after several months with no
lasting effects. Some infants with neonatal lupus can also have a serious heart
defect. With proper testing, physicians can now identify most at-risk mothers, and
the infant can be treated at or before birth. Most infants of mothers with lupus are
entirely healthy. 