Transatlantic Tech Bridge: Digital Infrastructure and Subsea Cables, a US Perspective
1. US strategic interests in digital infrastructure and its industrial policy
 The United States’ overarching strategic goal is an open, secure, interoperable and 
global internet, one where US digital leaders can compete (and win). This requires 
trusted digital infrastructure. US investment in digital infrastructure reveals 
both domestic and international priorities. The 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure 
Bill provides 65 billion US dollars for high-speed internet deployment.6 Its focus 
is on providing connectivity for low-income households through the Affordable 
Connectivity Program and reaching underserved rural, agricultural and tribal 
areas.7 The “Internet for All” initiative manages grants for infrastructure and 
training.8 In the international development space, digital infrastructure is one of 
three pillars of USAID’s digital strategy and its digital ecosystem framework.9
 US firms retain a leading position in the ownership of subsea cables, and along with 
Japanese and French firms continue to supply the equipment for most projects. 
Cables were traditionally owned by a consortium of telecom firms, but this model 
has seen its share diminish with the influx of cables owned by content providers 
(the hyperscalers). Unlike other digital technologies, the supply chain for the raw 
materials that make up the cables is not dependent on China.10 Global cooperation 
takes place through formats like the UN’s International Telecommunications 
Union and multistakeholder arrangements like the International Cable Protection
Committee. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) 
provides an important legal framework for ocean policy and undersea cables, 
including cable protection zones and a dispute resolution framework. The US, 
however, has failed to ratify UNCLOS for decades and even in the case of US 
ratification, credible enforcement would be difficult.11
Geopolitics and rising concerns about China have upended the world of subsea 
cables. Digital infrastructure, and undersea cables in particular, fit into a wider 
strategy for the US and are a key element of “outcompeting” China. This is leading 
to what has been dubbed a “subsea cold war”.12 Concerns are multifaceted and 
overlapping, including the physical security of infrastructure, espionage, economic 
competitiveness and support for domestic firms, fears of technology leakage and 
geopolitical competition. In promoting the view that “the digital backbones of the 
modern economy must be open, trusted, interoperable, reliable, and secure”,13 US 
strategy is highly focused on countering China’s “digital silk road”.
 Digital infrastructure is critical, but also a potential vector for insecurity and 
subject to disruptions, both accidental and deliberate. But attribution and assessing 
conflicting motivations among potential adversaries can be difficult. There is 
still significant uncertainty around cyberthreats and subsea cables, with limited 
publicly available information or attribution. The majority of cable faults – around 
a hundred per year – are attributable to accidental errors, such as damage from 
fishing vessels, or geologic incidents.14 But the risk and fear of state-directed cyber
attacks or physical sabotage is rising. Many examples remain hypothetical; and 
concrete details or attribution are classified or unknown. One of the few known 
events, a 2022 cyber-attack in Hawaii that the Department of Homeland Security 
claimed to have foiled, was merely attributed to an “international hacking group”.15 
Chinese ships have been accused of damaging cables in the Taiwan straits as part 
of a pressure campaign on the island.16
 The US is particularly concerned about potential for espionage from adversaries 
like China and Russia. Tapping into and filtering the enormous quantities of 
information on subsea cables is extremely difficult, especially at great depths,
and only a few countries likely have such capabilities. Landing stations where 
cables come ashore, however, have been identified as potential vulnerabilities, 
where lax security could allow for monitoring or tapping of the cables. The US can 
illustrate its concerns about growing control of infrastructure by adversaries by 
pointing to cases like the Federated States of Micronesia, where China pressured 
the government to grant it control of cables and telecom infrastructure via a 
Memorandum of Understanding.17 The point here is that Chinese infrastructure 
investments through the digital silk road will lead to de-facto control and facilitate 
espionage. Cost-reduction measures by cable owners have also led to increased 
deployment of remote network management systems, which introduce new 
vulnerabilities to hacking or sabotage since they are connected to the internet.18
 The US has responded to these concerns with legislation like the Secure and 
Trusted Communications Networks Act of 2019, which charged the Federal 
Communications Commission with carrying out the complex rip-and-replace 
process for Huawei-made infrastructure domestically.19 The US has also expressed 
concerns about Europe’s reliance on 5G infrastructure from Huawei.20 The National 
Security Strategy released in October 2022 warns that autocratic governments 
“leverage access to their markets and control of global digital infrastructure for 
coercive purposes” and cites China as a source of “untrusted digital infrastructure”.21
 The US has also acted to ensure continued market dominance by US and allied 
firms. Between 2015 and 2019, Chinese investments through the digital silk road 
led to control by Huawei Marine (which became HMN Tech in 2019) of about 15 
per cent of the global market.22 Sanctions were placed on HMN Tech in 2021, citing 
its “intention to acquire American technology to help modernize China’s People’s 
Liberation Army”.23 This issue also predates the current Biden Administration. 
In addition to sanctions placed on Huawei, President Trump’s “Executive Order 
on Establishing the Committee for the Assessment of Foreign Participation in 
the United States Telecommunications Services Sector” provided structure to 
an interagency team known as “Team Telecom” charged with reviewing foreign
investment in telecom and broadcast firms.24 Run by the Department of Justice’s 
National Security Division, it makes licensing recommendations to the Federal 
Communications Commission with the goal of ensuring that no cable directly 
connects the US and the Chinese mainland or Hong Kong.25 The US Congress has 
also been somewhat vocal on the issue. For example, the Undersea Cable Control 
Act passed the House in March 2023.26
 Recent years have therefore seen significant shifts in undersea cable investment, 
with many new cables rerouted to avoid China and the South China Sea.27 While 
warnings of an undersea splinternet may be exaggerated, the sector is nevertheless 
seeing important shifts in investment, particularly for transpacific cables. From 
2016 to 2020, 75 per cent of cables included at least one Chinese owner. Projections 
for 2021–2025 plummet to 0 per cent (see Figure 2). Significant reductions are 
apparent in other Asia connections as well.
The US government has also intervened in cases of Chinese involvement in 
infrastructure projects and exerted pressure which has led to cancellation of 
cable initiatives or contracts if awarded to Chinese firms. For example, a 2018 
proposed consortium led by Amazon, Meta and China Mobile met with opposition 
from Washington. US security concerns remained even following China Mobile’s 
departure, and the project was shelved despite much of the cable having already 
been laid.28 The 600 million US dollar SeaWeMe-6 cable connecting Singapore to 
France was awarded to the US’s SubCom over HMN Tech following diplomatic 
pressure and incentives like training grants to local telecom firms from the US 
Trade and Development Agency.29 At the same time, this pressure, along with 
sanctions, has influenced cable-building endeavours that do not include US 
investors or connect geographically to the US.30
 Such events illustrate the strategic competitive and economic interests at stake, 
as technology becomes a key site of geopolitical competition. In order to counter 
China, the United States is working to build a network of partnerships on digital 
infrastructure. The US CABLES programme provides capacity building and 
technical assistance to members of the Quad alliance in the Indo-Pacific.31 The 
Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment (PGII) through the G7 aims 
to offer an alternative to China’s Belt and Road Investments,32 and included cables 
as part of a recent PGII announcement on the sidelines of the G20.33 The US also 
launched the Trilateral Partnership for Infrastructure Investment with Australia 
and Japan in 2018.34 The NATO undersea infrastructure coordination cell, launched 
in 2023, coordinates between military, civilian and industry interests in subsea 
infrastructure to increase security.35 The State Department’s 2020 Clean Network 
Initiative, whose scope extends beyond subsea cables, created a set of shared 
principles and practices for countries and companies with the goal of blocking 
Chinese market dominance.36