Regulatory Powers
Regulators implement policy using their powers, which vary by agency. Powers, which can also 
be thought of as tools, can be grouped into a few broad categories:
• Licensing, chartering, or registration. A starting point for understanding the 
regulatory system is that most activities cannot be undertaken unless a firm, 
individual, or market has received the proper credentials from the appropriate 
state or federal regulator. Each type of charter, license, or registration granted by 
the respective regulator governs the sets of financial activities that the holder is 
permitted to engage in. For example, a firm cannot accept federally insured 
3 U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), Financial Regulation, GAO-16-175, February 2016, 
https://www.gao.gov/assets/680/675400.pdf.
Who Regulates Whom? An Overview of the U.S. Financial Regulatory Framework
Congressional Research Service 3
deposits unless it is chartered as a bank, thrift, or credit union by a depository 
institution regulator. Likewise, an individual generally cannot buy and sell 
securities to others unless licensed as a broker-dealer.4 To be granted a license, 
charter, or registration, the recipient must accept the terms and conditions that 
accompany it. Depending on the type, those conditions could include regulatory 
oversight, training requirements, and a requirement to act according to a set of 
standards or code of ethics. Failure to meet the terms and conditions could result 
in fines, penalties, remedial actions, license or charter revocation, or criminal 
charges.
• Rulemaking. Regulators issue rules (regulations) through the rulemaking 
process to implement statutory mandates.5 Typically, statutory mandates provide 
regulators with a policy goal in general terms, and regulations fill in the specifics. 
Rules lay out the guidelines for how market participants may or may not act to 
comply with the mandate.
• Oversight and supervision. Regulators ensure that their rules are adhered to 
through oversight and supervision. This allows regulators to observe market 
participants’ behavior and instruct them to modify or cease improper behavior. 
Supervision may entail active, ongoing monitoring (as for banks) or investigating 
complaints and allegations ex post (as is common in securities markets). In some 
cases, such as banking, supervision includes periodic examinations and 
inspections, whereas in other cases, regulators rely more heavily on selfreporting. Regulators explain supervisory priorities and points of emphasis by 
issuing supervisory letters and guidance. 
• Enforcement. Regulators can compel firms to modify their behavior through 
enforcement powers. Enforcement powers include the ability to issue fines, 
penalties, and cease-and-desist orders; to undertake criminal or civil actions in 
court or administrative proceedings or arbitrations; and to revoke licenses and 
charters. In some cases, regulators initiate legal action at their own prompting or 
in response to consumer or investor complaints. In other cases, regulators 
explicitly allow consumers and investors to sue for damages when firms do not 
comply with regulations, or they provide legal protection to firms that do comply.
• Resolution. Some regulators have the power to resolve a failing firm by taking 
control of the firm and initiating conservatorship (i.e., the regulator runs the firm 
on an ongoing basis) or receivership (i.e., the regulator winds the firm down). 
Other types of failing financial firms are resolved through bankruptcy, a judicial 
process separate from the regulators.
Goals of Regulation
Financial regulation is primarily intended to achieve the following underlying policy outcomes:6
• Market efficiency and integrity. Regulators seek to ensure that markets operate 
efficiently and that market participants have confidence in the market’s integrity. 
4 One may obtain separate licenses to be a broker or a dealer, but in practice, many obtain both.
5 For more information, see CRS Report R41546, A Brief Overview of Rulemaking and Judicial Review, by Todd 
Garvey.
6 Regulators are also tasked with promoting certain social goals, such as community reinvestment or affordable 
housing. Because this report focuses on regulation, it will not discuss social goals.
Who Regulates Whom? An Overview of the U.S. Financial Regulatory Framework
Congressional Research Service 4
Liquidity, low costs, the presence of many buyers and sellers, the availability of 
information, and a lack of excessive volatility are examples of the characteristics 
of an efficient market. Regulation can also improve market efficiency by 
addressing market failures, such as principal-agent problems,7
asymmetric 
information,8
and moral hazard.9 Regulators contribute to market integrity by 
ensuring that activities are transparent, contracts can be enforced, and the “rules 
of the game” they set are enforced. Integrity generally leads to greater efficiency.
• Consumer and investor protection. Regulators seek to ensure that consumers or 
investors do not suffer from fraud, discrimination, manipulation, and theft. 
Regulators try to prevent exploitative or abusive practices intended to take 
advantage of unwitting consumers or investors. In some cases, protection is 
limited to enabling consumers and investors to understand the inherent risks 
when they enter into a transaction. In other cases, protection is based on the 
principle of suitability—efforts to ensure that more risky products or product 
features are accessible only to financially sophisticated or secure consumers or 
investors.
• Capital formation and access to credit. Regulators seek to ensure that firms 
and consumers are able to access credit and capital to meet their needs such that 
credit and economic activity can grow at a healthy rate. Regulators try to ensure 
that capital and credit are available to all worthy borrowers, regardless of 
personal characteristics, such as race, gender, and location. Examples are fair 
lending laws and fair housing goals.
• Illicit activity prevention. Regulators seek to ensure that the financial system 
cannot be used to support criminal and terrorist activity. Examples are policies to 
prevent money laundering, tax evasion, terrorism financing, and the 
contravention of financial sanctions.
• Taxpayer protection. Regulators seek to ensure that losses or failures in 
financial markets do not result in federal government payouts or the assumption 
of liabilities that are ultimately borne by taxpayers. Only certain types of 
financial activity are explicitly backed by the federal government or by regulatorrun insurance schemes that are backed by the federal government, such as the 
Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) run by the FDIC. Such schemes are self-financed 
by the insured firms through premium payments unless the losses exceed the 
insurance fund, in which case taxpayer money is used temporarily or 
permanently to fill the gap. In the case of a financial crisis, the government may 
decide that the “least bad” option is to provide funds in ways not explicitly 
promised or previously contemplated to restore stability. “Bailouts” of large 
failing firms in 2008 are the most well-known examples. In this sense,  there may 
be implicit taxpayer backing of parts or all of the financial system.
• Financial stability. Financial regulation seeks to maintain financial stability 
through preventive and palliative measures that mitigate systemic risk. At times, 
financial markets stop functioning well—markets freeze, participants panic, 
7 For example, financial agents may have incentives to make decisions that are not in the best interests of their clients, 
and clients may not be able to adequately monitor their behavior.
8 For example, firms issuing securities know more about their financial prospects than do investors purchasing those 
securities, which can result in a “lemons” problem in which low-quality firms drive high-quality firms out of the 
marketplace.
9 For example, individuals may act more imprudently if they are insured against a risk.
Who Regulates Whom? An Overview of the U.S. Financial Regulatory Framework
Congressional Research Service 5
credit becomes unavailable, and multiple firms fail. Financial instability can be 
localized (to a specific market or activity) or more general. Sometimes instability 
can be contained and quelled through market actions or policy intervention; at 
other times, instability metastasizes and does broader damage to the real 
economy. The most recent example of the latter was the financial crisis of 2007-
2009. Traditionally, financial stability concerns have centered on banking, but the 
recent crisis illustrates the potential for systemic risk to arise in other parts of the 
financial system as well.
These regulatory goals are sometimes complementary but at other times conflict with each other. 
For example, without an adequate level of consumer and investor protections, fewer individuals 
may be willing to participate in financial markets, and efficiency and capital formation could 
suffer. But, at some point, too many consumer and investor safeguards and protections could 
make credit and capital prohibitively expensive, reducing market efficiency and capital formation. 
Regulation generally aims to seek a middle ground between these two extremes in which 
regulatory burden is as small as possible and regulatory benefits are as large as possible. Because 
some firms can cope with regulatory burden better than others can, sometimes regulation is 
tailored so that smaller firms, for example, are exempted from a regulation or face a streamlined 
version of a regulation. As a result, when taking any action, regulators balance the tradeoffs 
between their various goals.