Theoretically, Problematic Online Game Use (POGU) and online game addiction are the same; they refer to an excessive online game use that results in negative impact (Kim & Kim, 2010). This is asserted by theoretical perspective from Young (1998), in his theory, POGU is derived
from the characteristics of people suffering from internet addiction (IA), which is based on the criteria of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-V). Addictive behavior can be defined as a condition where an individual is addicted to a certain thing he loves on various occasions, which emerges from a lack of behavioral control, making them feel guilty when they do not satisfy their desire. This asserts that addiction is compulsive and lack of control aspect of behavior (Griffiths, 2005). They usually do what they love on any occasion.

How to distinguish between addiction and addiction tendencies, researchers refer to the proposed criteria in the DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) which explains that the severity of the disorder is based on the extent to which it interferes with daily activities. The proposed criteria in question are continuous and repeated use of the Internet to play games, often with other players, causing clinically significant disturbance or distress that is characterized as unsuccessful attempts to control online gaming behaviour, an increase in the amount of time playing online games, playing online games has become a dominant activity in an individual's life, health problems and relationships with others arise as a result of playing online games by individuals and this in a 12 month period.

Online game gains its popularity among adolescents, it offers a number of attractiveness, making adolescents prefer to play game than to study, and this has become habit among adolescents. In addition to impulsivity and aggression, enjoyment and competitive feelings can be associated with gambling addiction because dark personality traits are associated with higher levels of enjoyment and satisfaction with one's unhappiness can be facilitated by games (James, Kavanagh, Jonason, Chonody and Scrutton, 2014). There are some motivations that make someone playing online game. According to (Yee, 2006), there are ten subcomponents of motivation, causing ones to play online game, they are categorized into three components, namely achievement, social, and immersion. APJII's survey result in 2017 proves that the largest online game users were in the age of 19-34 years old (49.52%, or 70.94 million users). The survey conducted by the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology revealed that Indonesia has the sixth-largest internet users in the world, and most of them are adolescents aged 15 to 19 years old, the age of high school and university students.

This phenomenon is opposite to what university students should do. Students have a number of duties in university. The students supposed to study, obey the rule, respect the teacher, be discipline, and maintain the university reputation. The present study aimed to see the level of online game addiction and online use motive among the students of Semarang State University. As Wijayanti (2013) argued, one's motive in playing online game affects their level of addiction.

METHOD

This was a prevalence study with cross-sectional survey approach. The study was conducted in Semarang State University. The population of the study was all students of Semarang State University. By using random sampling technique, 568 students were selected as the subjects of study. The data of study were collected using two scales, addiction scale and online game use motives scale. Addiction scale used in the present study was adapted from Game Addiction Scale developed by Lemmens, Valkenburg, & Peter (2009). This scale consists of 21 categories with 3 categories on each aspect related to the seven criteria for online gaming addiction according to Lemmens, Valkenburg and Peter, which are silence, tolerance, mood swings, relapse. , addiction, conflict and problems. This tool has a Cronbach Alpha score of 0.94. There are no adverse factors in this measurement tool.

Besides, online game use motives scale was adapted from instrument developed by Demetrovics et al. (2011), namely, motives for Online Gaming Questionnaire (MOGQ). This scale consists of 27 items that measure seven aspects of gambling motivation: escape (escape from reality), cope (overcome stress and distress), fantasy (gambling identity and experience), skill development (such as attention and coordination), Recreation (entertainment and fun), Competition (challenge and compete with others) and Social (establishment and maintenance of social relationship). MOGQ is the first tool designed to measure the motivation of online gamers of all ages. These include the major gambling motives identified in previous studies and exhibit high internal consistency. Univariate data analysis and bivariate correlation were employed. There were five interval criteria to interpret the percentage, Very Low, Low, Fair, High, and Very High. The result was categorized as Very High if its percentage is in the range of 84%-100%. It was categorized as High if its percentage is in the range of 68%-83%. It was categorized as Fair if its percentage is in the range of 52%-67%. It was categorized as Low if its percentage is in the range of 36%-51%. While it was categorized as Very Low if its percentage is in the range of 20%-35%. Data analysis using correlation analysis and multiple linear regression. Researchers used the application of Statistical Product and Service Solution (SPSS) version 22.