In recent years, researchers and public health programs and practices have focused on preventing, managing, and controlling traditional CVD risk factors by instituting timely intervention programs, identifying social determinants of health (SDOH), examining disparities in CVD risks, assessing the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on CVD risks, and implementing collective efforts through community-based approaches to achieve population-level improvements in cardiovascular health. This special PCD collection of 20 articles published from January 2020 through November 2022 highlights some of these efforts by using multiple data sources collected before or during the pandemic. For instance, cigarette smoking and risk-enhancing factors related to pregnancy have been shown to increase CVD risks with significant implications (eg, increased infant mortality). Disparities in hypertension, stroke, and stroke mortality exist, exhibiting significant sociodemographic (eg, racial) and geographic (eg, rural–urban, county, zip code) variations. Intervention programs, such as behavioral modifications strengthening chronic disease awareness, use of self-measured blood pressure monitoring, and sodium intake reduction, are evaluated. The impact of COVID-19 on CVD is also explored. Finally, systematic reviews and meta-analyses evaluated the associations of circulating vitamin D levels, vitamin D supplementation, or high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) with blood pressure or stroke. These 20 articles advance our understanding of effective CVD risk management and intervention programs in multiple settings — in the general population and among high-risk groups — with a health equity lens across 3 broad themes further explored in this essay:
 

 Examining factors contributing to CVD risk
 Exploring factors contributing to disparities in CVD
 Using community-based approaches to decrease CVDExamining the Factors Contributing to CVD Risk
 The greatest contributors to CVD-related years of life lost globally are tobacco exposure, hypertension, high body mass index (BMI), and high fasting plasma glucose (3). Tobacco exposure, including cigarette smoking, secondhand smoke, and use of smokeless tobacco, contributed to 8.7 million deaths worldwide in 2019, one-third of which were due to CVD (3). Hypertension affects more than 4 billion people worldwide, representing a near doubling in the absolute prevalence of hypertension since 1990 (3). In the US, nearly half of adults (47%) have hypertension, but only about 1 in 4 (24%) have their condition under control (7). Elevated BMI continues to increase globally, with significant effects on death, disability, and quality of life (3). The prevalence of obesity has increased worldwide in the past 50 years, reaching pandemic levels. Obesity represents a major health challenge because it substantially increases the risk of diseases such as hypertension, myocardial infarction, stroke, type 2 diabetes, and dementia, thereby contributing to a decline in both quality of life and life expectancy (8). Furthermore, global increases in high fasting plasma glucose and its sequelae, type 2 diabetes, have mirrored the increases seen in BMI over the past 3 decades (9). Other behavioral risks (eg, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity, inadequate sleep, excessive alcohol use); environmental risks (eg, air pollution, extreme temperatures); and social risks (eg, house and food insecurity) also contribute to increased CVD burden and disparities in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality (10)
 Several of the contextual risk factors attributed to increased CVD burden are covered in this special collection. Cigarette smoking persists among adults with chronic disease. Using data from the 2019 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Loretan and colleagues reported that more than 1 in 4 US adults aged 18 to 64 years with 1 or more chronic diseases associated with smoking were current smokers (11). The current cigarette smoking prevalence in the US reached 51.9% among adults aged 18 to 44 years with 2 or more chronic diseases (11). Furthermore, that study showed that smoking cessation services were not being provided to almost 1 in 3 people who have a chronic disease, leaving important steps to be taken toward successful smoking cessation in this population (11). Also concerning, rates of smoking vary significantly across countries, and approximately 1 billion people smoke globally, with significant negative implications for cardiovascular health (3). Goulding and colleagues used National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data collected from 2011 through 2018 to provide estimates of the prevalence of high blood pressure among US children aged 8 to 17 years. The authors documented that elevated blood pressure was most prevalent among children who were older, male, or non-Hispanic Black, with factors beyond inequalities in body weight likely contributing to disparities in elevated blood pressure (12). Furthermore, a meta-analysis conducted by Qie and colleagues determined that a high level of HDL-C may provide a protective effect on the risk of total stroke and ischemic stroke but may increase the risk of intracerebral hemorrhage (13). Another meta-analysis by Zhang and colleagues found an L-shaped dose–response relationship between circulating vitamin D levels and the risk of hypertension; however, the pooled results of randomized controlled trials did not show vitamin D supplementation to be effective in preventing hypertension (14).
 Studies in this collection also identified populations and communities with higher prevalence or at higher risk for CVD. In a cross-sectional study using 2018 NHIS data, Mendez and colleagues documented a higher prevalence of CVD and its risk factors among US adults with vision impairment (15). Salahuddin and colleagues documented zip code variations in infant mortality rates associated with a high prevalence of maternal cardiometabolic high-risk conditions (chronic or gestational diabetes, chronic or gestational hypertension, smoking during pregnancy, and prepregnancy obesity) in 2 counties in Texas (16). Findings from these articles could direct efforts to implement appropriate strategies to prevent, manage, and control CVD in populations at high risk.
 Top
 Exploring Factors Contributing to Disparities in CVD
 CVD and its related risk factors are increasingly recognized as growing indicators of global health disparities (17). Globally, differences in morbidity and mortality from CVD exist among high-, middle-, and low-income countries and across ethnic groups (1,3,5,6,17,18). In the US, disparities in CVD morbidity, mortality, and risk factors have persisted for decades, with concerning stagnation and significant upward trends since the early 2000s (18). Disparities are largely influenced by demographic, socioeconomic, and environmental factors (19,20). For example, African American and American Indian adults experience a higher burden of cardiovascular risk factors and CVD compared with non-Hispanic White adults (18). Unfortunately, structural racism remains a significant cause of poor cardiovascular health, restricting racial and ethnic minority populations from opportunities to live healthier lives, in healthier neighborhoods, and from access to quality education and health care (20).