Artificial Intelligence Technologies in Selected Sectors

AI technologies have potential applications across a wide range of sectors. A selection of broad, crosscutting issues with application-specific examples of ongoing congressional interest are discussed in the CRS report Artificial Intelligence: Background, Selected Issues, and Policy Considerations. Those issues and examples include implications for the U.S. workforce, international competition and federal investment in AI R&D, standards development, and ethical AI—including questions about bias, fairness, and algorithm transparency (for example, in criminal justice applications).

In addition to those issues and applications, three areas of potential use that may be of growing interest to Congress—particularly in light of the advances in, and widespread availability of, GenAI tools—are health care, education, and national security. In other parts of the federal government, experts have asserted a need to understand the impacts and future directions of AI applications in these areas. For example, the chief AI officer at the Department of Health and Human Services, Greg Singleton, at a June 2023 Health Innovation Summit discussed “the role that AI will play in health care, as well as the importance of regulations.”  A May 2023 Department of Education report, Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Teaching and Learning, describes the rising interest in AI in education and highlights reasons to address AI in education now. And the 2023 Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community states, “New technologies—particularly in the fields of AI and biotechnology—are being developed and are proliferating faster than companies and governments can shape norms, protect privacy, and prevent dangerous outcomes.” This section will discuss some of the potential benefits and concerns with the use of AI technologies in these sectors. 

Health Care

Numerous companies and researchers have been developing and testing AI technologies for use in health care—for example, to improve the drug development process by increasing efficiency and decreasing time and cost, to detect diseases earlier, and to more consistently analyze medical data. A 2022 report by the Government Accountability Office identified a variety of ML-based technologies to assist with the diagnostic processes for five selected diseases—certain cancers, diabetic retinopathy (an eye condition that can cause blindness in diabetic patients), Alzheimer’s disease, heart disease, and COVID-19—though these ML technologies have generally not been widely adopted. Some hospitals have also experimented with using voice recognition, and associated ML and natural language processing technology, to assist doctors and patients.

While there are many encouraging developments for using AI technologies in health care, stakeholders have remarked on the slow progress in using AI broadly within health care settings, and various challenges remain. Researchers and clinicians have raised questions about the accuracy, security, and privacy of these technologies; the availability of sufficient health data on which to train systems; medical liability in the event of adverse outcomes; the adequacy of current user consent processes; and patient access and receptivity.  These questions reflect the potential risks from using AI systems. For example, a poorly designed system might lead to misdiagnosis; systems trained on biased data can reflect or amplify those biases in their outputs; and if a flawed AI system is adopted widely, it might result in widespread injury to patients.

Education

According to the U.S. Department of Education, AI, ML, and related technologies “will have powerful impacts on learning, not only through direct supports for students, but also by empowering educators to be more adaptive to learner needs and less consumed by routine, repetitive tasks.” The report also notes that AI in education presents risks, including apprehension from parents and educators and the potential for AI algorithms to be biased, possibly leading to unfair decisions about what or how a student should learn.

The rapid development of AI chatbots and the public release of ChatGPT in November 2022 have spurred debate among teachers and education administrators. Some teachers have begun using these AI tools in their classrooms, highlighting benefits such as making lessons more interactive, aiding the development of critical thinking skills, teaching students media literacy, generating personalized lesson plans, saving teachers time on administration, and aiding students whose first language is not English. Others have raised concerns about students using the systems to cheat on assignments by writing essays and taking tests for them, with some school systems banning the use of chatbots on their networks. Numerous researchers and companies have been developing and deploying detection tools to identify text generated by AI, though there remain issues with the accuracy of these tools. Stakeholders have also raised concerns about data privacy risks, including, for example, whether information shared or stored in AI-enabled systems is used for further product training without gaining explicit user consent and, more broadly, whether such systems are subject to federal or state privacy laws, such as the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act.

National Security 

AI technologies have a wide range of national security applications, including intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; logistics; cyber operations; command and control; semiautonomous and autonomous vehicles; and weapons systems. Since at least 2017, the U.S. military has begun integrating AI systems into combat systems and discussing AI as a key technology to ensure future warfighting capabilities. At the same time, other countries, including China and Russia, have released national plans and statements of intent to lead in the development of AI technologies.

The Department of Defense’s (DOD’s) unclassified investments in AI have grown from just over $600 million in FY2016 to approximately $1.1 billion in FY2023, with DOD maintaining over 685 active AI projects. DOD has an AI strategy, which outlines the following aims: delivering AI-enabled capabilities for key missions; partnering with leading private sector technology companies, academia, and global allies; cultivating a leading AI workforce; and leading in military ethics and AI safety.  The intelligence community (IC) has also released a strategy for using AI—the AIM Initiative—as well as AI ethics principles and an AI ethics framework for the IC. While AI holds to potential to assist the IC in its work, AI systems also “pose grave security challenges for which [the United States is] currently unprepared, including the development of novel cyber weapons, large-scale disinformation attacks, and the design of advanced biological weapons.”