Bacterial meningitis is a rare but potentially fatal disease. Several types of bacteria can first cause an upper respiratory tract infection and then travel through the bloodstream to the brain. The disease also can occur when certain bacteria invade the meninges directly. Bacterial meningitis can cause stroke, hearing loss, and permanent brain damage. Pneumococcal meningitis is the most common form of meningitis and is the most serious form of bacterial meningitis. Some 6,000 cases of pneumococcal meningitis are reported in the United States each year. The disease is caused by the bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae, which also causes pneumonia, blood poisoning (septicemia), and ear and sinus infections. At particular risk are children under age 12 and adults with a weakened immune system. People who have had pneumococcal meningitis often suffer neurological damage ranging from deafness to severe brain damage. Meningococcal meningitis is caused by the bacterium Neisseria meningitudes. Each year in the United States about 2,600 people get this highly contagious disease. High-risk groups include infants under the age of 1 year, people with suppressed immune systems, travelers to foreign countries where the disease is endemic, and military recruits and others who reside in dormitories. Between 10-15 percent of cases are fatal, with another 10-15 percent causing brain damage and other serious side effects. 5 Haemophilus influenzae meningitis was at one time the most common form of bacterial meningitis. Fortunately, the Haemophilus influenzae b vaccine has greatly reduced the number of cases in the United States (see Treatment section). Those most at risk of getting this disease are children in child-care settings and children who do not have access to this vaccine. Other forms of bacterial meningitis include Listeria monocytogenes meningitis (in which certain foods such as unpasteurized dairy or deli meats are sometimes implicated); Escherichia coli meningitis, which is most common in elderly adults and newborns and may be transmitted to a baby through the birth canal; and Mycobacterium tuberculosis meningitis, a rare disease that occurs when the bacterium that causes tuberculosis attacks the meninges. Viral, or aseptic, meningitis is usually caused by enteroviruses—common viruses that enter the body through the mouth and travel to the brain and surrounding tissues where they multiply. Enteroviruses are present in mucus, saliva, and feces, and can be transmitted through direct contact with an infected person or an infected object or surface. Other viruses that cause meningitis include Varicella zoster (the virus that causes chicken pox and can appear decades later as shingles), influenza, mumps, HIV, and Herpes simplex type 2 (genital herpes). Fungal infections can affect the brain. The most common form of fungal meningitis is caused by the fungus Cryptococcus neoformans (found mainly in dirt and bird droppings). 6 It can be slow to develop and smolder for weeks. Although treatable, fungal meningitis often recurs in nearly half of affected persons. Parasitic causes include cysticercosis (a tapeworm infection in the brain), which is common in other parts of the world, as well as cerebral malaria. There are rare cases of amoebic meningitis, sometimes related to fresh water swimming, which can be rapidly fatal. 

People who are suspected of having meningitis or encephalitis should receive immediate, aggressive medical treatment. Both diseases can progress quickly and have the potential to cause severe, irreversible neurological damage. Effective vaccines are available to prevent Haemophilus influenzae, pneumococcal and meningococcal meningitis. Two types of vaccines are available in the United States to help prevent meningococcal meningitis. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends vaccination with a meningococcal conjugate vaccine for all preteens and teens ages 11 to 12 years, with a booster dose at 16 years old. Teens and young adults (ages 16 through 23) also may be vaccinated with a serogroup B meningococcal vaccine. If meningococcal meningitis is diagnosed, people in close contact with an infected individual should be given preventative antibiotics. Early treatment of bacterial meningitis involves antibiotics that can cross the bloodbrain barrier (a lining of cells that keeps harmful micro-organisms and chemicals from entering the brain). Appropriate antibiotic treatment for most types of meningitis can greatly reduce the risk of dying from the disease. Anticonvulsants to prevent seizures and corticosteroids to reduce brain inflammation may be prescribed. Infected sinuses may need to be drained. Corticosteroids such as prednisone may be ordered to relieve brain pressure and swelling and to prevent hearing loss that is common in some forms of meningitis. Lyme disease, a bacterial infection, is treated with antibiotics. meningitis is rarely life threatening and no specific treatment is needed. Fungal meningitis is treated with intravenous antifungal medications. Antiviral drugs used to treat viral encephalitis include acyclovir and ganciclovir. For most encephalitis-causing viruses, no specific treatment is available. Autoimmune causes of encephalitis are treated with additional immunosuppressant drugs and screening for underlying tumors when appropriate. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, a non-infectious inflammatory brain disease mostly seen in children, is treated with steroids. Anticonvulsants may be prescribed to stop or prevent seizures. Corticosteroids can reduce brain swelling. Affected individuals with breathing difficulties may require artificial respiration. Once the acute illness is under control, comprehensive rehabilitation should include cognitive rehabilitation and physical, speech, and occupational therapy. Can meningitis and encephalitis be prevented? Effective vaccines are available to prevent some forms of meningitis. People should avoid sharing food, utensils, glasses, and other objects with someone who may be exposed to or have the infection. People should wash their hands often with soap and rinse under running water. People who live, work, or go to school with someone who has been diagnosed with bacterial meningitis may be asked to take antibiotics for a few days as a preventive measure. Also, people should limit outdoor activities at night, wear long-sleeved clothing when outdoors, use insect repellents that are most effective for that particular region of the country, and rid lawn and outdoor areas of free-standing pools of water, in which mosquitoes breed. What is the prognosis for these infections? Outcome generally depends on the particular infectious agent involved, the severity of the illness, and how quickly treatment is given. In most cases, people with very mild encephalitis or meningitis can make a full recovery, although the process may be slow. Individuals who experience only headache, fever, and stiff neck may recover in 2-4 weeks. Individuals with bacterial meningitis typically show some relief 48-72 hours following initial treatment but are more likely to experience complications caused by the disease. In more serious cases, these diseases can cause hearing and/or speech loss, blindness, permanent brain and nerve damage, behavioral changes, cognitive disabilities, lack of muscle control, seizures, and memory loss. These individuals may need long-term therapy, medication, and supportive care. The recovery from encephalitis is variable depending on the cause of the disease and extent of brain inflammation.
