The development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has been an incremental process, but particularly the public release of ChatGPT, an LLM-based conversational agent, in November 2022, sparked a worldwide hype and even speculation about impeding Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Articles in both popular and academic publications have discussed diverse opportunities, challenges, and implications of conversational agents (e.g., Dwivedi et al. 2023). The field is developing so fast, that there is hardly time to properly assess what is going on. For many organizations, governments, companies, and citizens, key questions are: What can it do exactly? Is it hype or real? What are the various ethical issues? It is this last question that we aim to (partially) address in this paper. Below, we will discuss several ethical issues aspects of one LLM-based conversational agent: ChatGPT.
 

 The authors have worked in multiple applied research and innovation projects, with numerous clients and partners, on the development and evaluation of AI systems, and aiming to integrate concerns for ethical aspects in these projects. It is from this vantage point that we are interested in the ethical aspects of conversational agents. We have observed that ethical concerns often remain implicit; the people involved rarely explicitly discuss ethical perspectives and aspects. Conversely, we propose that making such perspectives and aspects more explicit, and organizing reflection and deliberation, is necessary, if we want to move ‘from principles to practices’ (Morley et al. 2020). Such ethical reflection and deliberation are urgent when AI systems are deployed in practice; especially if people’s safety and fundamental rights are at stake. In this article we discuss an approach to organize ethical reflection and deliberation, around the seven key requirements of the European Commission’s High-Level Expert Group on AI (HLEG) (2019).
 

 There are diverse approaches to integrate ethical aspects in the development and deployment of technologies; methods can be used at the start of development, during development, or after development (Reijers et al. 2018). We propose that integrating ethical aspects during development and deployment would be most useful, especially when this is part of an iterative development process, like CRISP-DM (Martínez-Plumed et al. 2021; Shearer 2000). Furthermore, we propose to use different ethical perspectives more explicitly. Notably, we propose to use consequentialism, duty ethics, relational ethics, and virtue ethics (Van de Poel and Royakkers 2011), and to use them in parallel, as complimentary perspectives. Moreover, we understand ethics as an iterative and participatory process of ethical reflection, inquiry, and deliberation (REF removed for review). The task for the people involved is then to make room for such a process and to facilitate relevant people to participate. Such a process can have three (iterative) steps:
 

 Identify issues that are (potentially) at play in the project and reflect on these. A handful of issues works best (if there are more, one can cluster; if there are less, one can explore more.)
 

 Organize dialogues with relevant people, both inside and outside the organization, for example, stakeholders, to inquire into these issues from diverse perspectives and to hear diverse voices.
 

 Make decisions, for example, between different design options and test these in experiments; this promotes transparency and accountability. The key is to steer the project more consciously, explicitly, and carefully.
 

 Our focus is on the first step (identify issues); below, we identify and discuss a range of ethical aspects of one specific LLM-based conversational agent: ChatGPT. The second step (organize dialogues) and the third step (make decisions) are outside the current article’s scope. Below, we will introduce the ingredients of our approach: a modest form of systems thinking; four complementary ethical perspectives; and the HLEG’s seven key requirements. Then we illustrate our approach with a case study of ChatGPT. This case study is also meant to explore how different ethical perspectives are relevant to different key requirements. We close the paper with a discussion of our approach.
 Human agency and oversight, including fundamental rights; the HLEG proposes the principle of respect for human autonomy (2019, p. 12), which they describe as follows: ‘Humans interacting with AI systems must be able to keep full and effective self-determination over themselves […]. AI systems […] should be designed to augment, complement and empower human cognitive, social and cultural skills.’ Human oversight refers to measures that help ‘ensuring that an AI system does not undermine human autonomy’ (HLEG, 2019, p. 16).
 

 Technical robustness and safety; this requirement refers to resilience to attacks and other security risks; to having effective fallback plans to promote safety; and to accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility. The evaluation of many of these aspects would require technical tests or experiments. In this article, however, we will only identify and discuss these aspects, and not actually conduct tests or experiments.
 

 Privacy and data governance; various concerns are at play, notably: that privacy sensitive information has probably been part of the training corpus many LLMs; and that users can submit privacy sensitive data through their prompts, thus submitting these data to the organizations that owns these LLMs and the conversational agents built on them. This information can also be used for subsequent finetuning of the model.
 

 Transparency; the HLEG argues (2019, p. 12) that ‘[e]xplicability is crucial for building and maintaining users’ trust in AI systems. This means that processes need to be transparent, the capabilities and purpose of AI systems openly communicated, and decisions—to the extent possible—explainable to those directly and indirectly affected. […] The degree to which explicability is needed is highly dependent on the context and the severity of the consequences if that output is erroneous or otherwise inaccurate.’ It also includes traceability, explainability, and communication. Moreover, it refers not only to the explicability of the AI system itself, but also to the processes in which this AI system is used, the capabilities and purposes of this system, and to communication about these processes, capabilities, and purposes.
 

 Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness; the HLEG (2019, p. 12) describes fairness as having ‘both a substantive and a procedural dimension. The substantive dimension implies a commitment to: ensuring equal and just distribution of both benefits and costs, and ensuring that individuals and groups are free from unfair bias, discrimination and stigmatisation. […] The procedural dimension […] entails the ability to contest and seek effective redress against decisions made by AI systems and by the humans operating them.’ Fairness not only refers narrowly to an application, but also to the processes and organizations in which this application is used (REF removed). Related aspects are: accessibility and universal design, and involving stakeholders in design and deployment.
 

 Societal and environmental well-being; the HLEG proposes the principle of prevention of harm (2019, p. 12): ‘AI systems should neither cause nor exacerbate harm or otherwise adversely affect human beings’; they draw attention to ‘situations where AI systems can cause or exacerbate adverse impacts due to asymmetries of power or information, such as between employers and employees, businesses and consumers or governments and citizens’ and to harms to ‘the natural environment and all living beings.’
 

 Accountability; the HLEG describes this as ‘the assessment of algorithms, data and design processes’, through either internal or external audits; especially of applications that may affect fundamental rights or safety-critical applications (2019, pp. 19–20). It includes concerns for the auditability of systems and the ability to obtain redress for users; the HLEG recommends ‘accessible mechanisms… that ensure adequate redress’ (2019, p. 20).