Does Ozempic Have an Immediate Effect?
 Ozempic is a medication in the class of GLP-1 agonists, which mimic the action of a hormone called GLP-1 that your stomach naturally releases when you eat food. When blood sugar levels naturally start rising after you eat, these drugs stimulate the body to produce more insulin, which helps direct blood sugar into the body's cells to be used for energy.
 

 If you’re taking Ozempic for diabetes, “it doesn’t have the immediate effect that injecting actual insulin does,” she adds. Per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), rapid-acting insulin can start working in as little as 30 minutes to accelerate the entry of glucose into cells for metabolism into glycogen—a main source of energy for the body.
 

 Ozempic doesn’t have an immediate effect on weight loss either. “Ozempic is started at the lowest dose and advanced every four weeks,” says Mir Ali, M.D., a bariatric surgeon and the medical director of MemorialCare Surgical Weight Loss Center at Orange Coast Medical Center in Fountain Valley, CA. “Each patient responds differently. Some feel the effects immediately, while others may need to be on higher dose levels to feel the effects. When the patients are at the appropriate dose, they feel much less hungry and feel full for a longer period of time.”
 

 The effects of a dose of Ozempic last for about one week—this is why it’s injected once-weekly. “Some people may see a tapering of the effects towards the end of the one-week period, while others don’t,” says Dr. Ali.
 

 

 It should be noted that the same holds true for Wegovy. The main difference between Wegovy and Ozempic is the amount of semaglutide in each injectable dose: Wegovy’s maximum maintenance dose is 2.4 milligrams (mg), while Ozempic’s is 2 mg.
 

 Lowering Blood Sugar
 How Long Does It Take Ozempic to Lower Blood Sugar?
 Every patient is different, but you can expect to notice lower levels of blood sugar as quickly as within the first week of taking Ozempic, says Dr. Lofton. “The effect will be more dramatic as the doses increase over a period of months,” she says. For instance, if the patient’s dose is increased monthly, they should reach the maximum dose of 2 mg on the fourth month.
 

 Sticking to lower doses for the first four weeks helps lower side effects, but higher doses are required to lower blood sugar in the long term, per the official dosing guidelines. “How long it takes to achieve a healthy blood sugar level depends on how well the glucose was controlled prior to initiating Ozempic as well as the patient’s diet, exercise, and other medications,” Dr. Lofton says. Your doctor will carry out the hemoglobin A1C test—a simple blood test that measures your average blood sugar levels over the past three months. “It takes three months for hemoglobin A1C to change, so I would expect some improvement in hemoglobin A1C three months after starting Ozempic,” Dr. Lofton explains.
 

 For those individuals with type 2 diabetes who take metformin, which is the first-line medication used to treat the condition, some may find that adding—or switching to—a GPL-1 agonist drug like Ozempic may improve outcomes; this is something your doctor will evaluate if this applies to your situation.
 

 Some people with type 2 diabetes may take insulin and Ozempic. “Often, a patient’s insulin requirement decreases as Ozempic doses increase so it is likely that type 2 diabetes may no longer require insulin when on a GLP-1 agonist,” says Dr. Lofton. “This is ideal because insulin can cause weight gain.”
 

 Weight Loss
 How Long Does It Take Ozempic to Lead to Weight Loss?
 The effect of Ozempic on weight really depends on the individual, says Dr. Ali. “Some patients will experience a loss of appetite with the initial dose,” he says. “However, most patients will likely not see significant weight loss until they reach higher dose levels at eight-to-12 weeks.”
 

 In Dr. Lofton's experience, there is usually some weight loss in the first month. “If weight goals are not met, then the dose can be increased,” she notes.
 

 Ozempic’s results are impressive when compared to other types of weight management drugs. Eric Williamson, Ph.D., a dietitian who specializes in sports and weight management and the founder of Toronto, Canada-based Unlocked Fitness and Nutrition, points out that the older obesity meds like Saxenda (liraglutide) yielded modest results: an average of 5% to 8% weight loss over the course of 68 weeks.
 

 “In contrast, the recent GLP-1 agonists like semaglutide stand out as the most effective drugs to date, with individuals experiencing a substantial 15% to 20% body weight reduction over a 68-week period when coupled with lifestyle interventions including nutrition and exercise,” says Williamson.
 

 That sort of weight loss can improve your body’s insulin sensitivity and help reverse insulin resistance—your essential weapons for winning the battle when you have type 2 diabetes.
 

 Williamson believes that the success of semaglutide lies in its ability to address the most common barrier to weight loss: increased appetite. “While a calorie deficit remains essential for weight loss, semaglutide makes achieving this deficit more manageable by reducing appetite,” he explains.
 

 What to Expect
 What to Expect After Your First Ozempic Injection
 It’s normal to experience some side effects from a new medication. According to Dr. Ali, the most common side effects reported from Ozempic are gastrointestinal, such as nausea, diarrhea or constipation, stomach cramping, and vomiting.
 

 “There are receptors for GLP-1 in the GI tract, which affects how it functions and leads to side effects,” explains Dr. Ali. “However, these side effects tend to subside with continued use of the medication.” According to clinical trials, the majority of reports of nausea, vomiting, and/or diarrhea occurred during dose escalation. Dr. Lofton warns that if you’re taking Ozempic and can’t tolerate the side effects, you should speak to your prescriber.
 

 

 

 

 “Lifestyle intervention is still the first-line approach to obesity treatment,” Williamson says. “In most cases, physicians will recommend lifestyle support with professionals like dietitians first. Even when drugs like semaglutide are prescribed, it is meant to complement lifestyle changes by mitigating the challenge of heightened appetite.”
 

 Williamson adds that there are three main risks if certain lifestyle adjustments are not considered:
 

 Inadequate nutrient intake. “Because appetite can be lowered quite drastically with semaglutide, it’s important that people are choosing nutrient dense foods to get adequate amounts of vitamins and minerals,” he says.
 

 Muscle loss. A subset of participants taking Ozempic in a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine lost 39% of their weight as lean mass (the largest portion of which will be muscle mass). “Exercise and obtaining adequate protein is important to prevent this so that one metabolic health issue isn’t presented (i.e., low muscle mass) as another one is solved (i.e., high fat mass),” Williamson explains.
 

 Not losing weight. According to research published in Drug Design, Development and Therapy, there is still a small proportion of people (around 7%) who do not lose weight on semaglutide. Williamson points out that more studies are required, but in his practice (and coming across people on the drug on a near-daily basis), he does see some people who eat a high enough caloric density diet (i.e. a high amount of calories for small amount of food) that they do not enter a calorie deficit even on weight loss drugs. “A diet made up of mostly nutritious low-calorie density whole filling foods is still required for many to lose weight on these drugs,” he says. It’s also a habit that can help those who drop out of using drugs like Ozempic from gaining the weight back.