Research Evaluating the Impact of Menu Labeling It is difficult to predict what effect, if any, mandatory restaurant menu labeling will have on food purchasing and health outcomes. However, changes in behavior following implementation of calorie labeling regulations in other jurisdictions prior to publication of the final federal rule (e.g., New York City, Philadelphia, and King County, WA) may provide some insight. 
Studies of the Impact of Menu Labeling on Calories Purchased Studies examining the relationship between menu labeling and calorie purchasing behavior have yielded mixed findings. Although consumers often report ordering fewer calories as a result of menu labeling, studies examining restaurant transaction data have not consistently reported a decrease in calories purchased after implementation of menu labeling. This section discusses several studies that have evaluated the impact of menu labeling, using survey and transaction data, on calories purchased. 17 Findings from current research are limited because existing studies often vary in scope and methodology. 18 For example, several of the studies that did not find a post-labeling decrease in calories purchased were conducted by the same group of researchers using samples from lowincome communities in New York, NY and Newark, NJ, 19 and research has shown that there are socioeconomic disparities in calorie label use, with higher-income individuals being more likely to notice calorie labels.20 Another study limited its sample population to one chain of restaurants in King County, WA. 21 An additional factor to consider is the time frame between implementation of menu labeling and an assessment of purchasing behavior, as there needs to be enough time for an effect to take place. One study, for instance, did not find an effect at four to six months postmandatory menu labeling, but it did find a decrease in calories purchased 18 months after implementation.22 Another study that did not find an effect of menu labeling on calories purchased examined outcomes two months after implementation, which may not have been enough time for an effect to take place.23 In addition, most of these studies relied on self-reported data to assess customers’ awareness and use of calorie labels. Such self-reporting may not be accurate, as evidenced by the inconsistencies between reported calories purchased and actual calories purchased as indicated on receipts.24 Finally, these studies analyzed the number of calories purchased but not changes in calories consumed, which may differ in response to menu labeling. For example, in full-service restaurants, customers may be more likely to share a meal or eat half the meal and take the rest home, which would not be captured by transaction data. 
Similarly, in fast food or carry-out establishments, customers may consume only a portion of their meal, which would not be captured by transaction data. Studies of the Impact of Menu Labeling on Sales and Revenue In 2009, Starbucks commissioned a Stanford University study to determine how the menu labeling mandate in New York City (NYC) affected its overall sales.25 Findings indicate that after the implementation of mandatory calorie labeling, average calories per transaction fell by 6% at Starbucks, an effect that lasted 10 months after the calorie posting commenced. This effect was primarily found for food purchases, as the average food calories per transaction fell by 14% (i.e., approximately 14 calories per transaction), while average beverage calories per transaction did not substantially change. Changes in beverage calories may not be reflected in transaction data. For example, if a customer orders a latte and substitutes skim milk for 2% milk, or asks for one pump of syrup instead of the usual three or four, those substitutions would not be captured by transaction data because the cost of the latte would not change. This study also assessed the impact of calorie posting on Starbucks revenue, reporting no statistically significant change in revenue as a result of calorie labeling. Because cost data associated with the policy was unavailable, profits were not measured directly. The effect on revenue was divided into (1) the effect on the number of transactions and (2) the effect on revenue per transaction. The study found that daily store transactions increased by 1.4% on average, while revenue per transaction decreased by 0.8% on average for all Starbucks in NYC, resulting in a zero net impact of calorie posting on Starbucks revenues. In NYC Starbucks stores located within 100 meters of a Dunkin Donuts, daily revenue increased by 3.3% on average. To determine consumers’ preliminary knowledge of calories in Starbucks food and beverages, surveys were administered before and after the introduction of a calorie-posting law in Seattle.26 Pre-menu labeling survey data indicate that Starbucks customers tended to be inaccurate in predicting the number of calories in their beverage and food orders. Specifically, in this study, consumers overestimated the number of calories in beverages and underestimated the number of calories in food. This is consistent with the study’s finding that calorie posting discouraged individuals from purchasing food but not beverages. Because consumers tended to underestimate the number of calories in food items, seeing the posted caloric value, which was greater than initially expected, may have led consumers to reduce their food purchases. However, because consumers tended to overestimate beverage calories, calorie posting may not have discouraged people from purchasing beverages. Proponents of menu labeling argue that, in addition to affecting consumer purchasing behavior, mandatory menu labeling may incentivize restaurants to offer lower calorie options and provide consumers with healthier choices. A study in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine reported that new menu items in restaurant chains in 2013 contained approximately 60 fewer calories compared with menu items in 2012—a 12% drop in calories.27 This voluntary action by large chain restaurants may have been in anticipation of the ACA’s federal menu-labeling provisions which will be in effect May 7, 2018. 