Video Game Play and Real-World Violence We must stop the glorification of violence in our society. This includes the gruesome and grisly video games that are now commonplace. It is too easy today for troubled youth to surround themselves with a culture that celebrates violence. —Donald Trump, U.S. President (2019) The tendency to link violent crimes to the playing of violent video games is so prevalent that a term exists to describe it: “the Grand Theft Fallacy.” As one might guess from the word fallacy, this tendency is not only flawed, it gets matters entirely backward. Countries that consume more video games have lower levels of violent crime than those devoid of this media (Markey and Ferguson 2017). Months when people play violent video games the most tend to be safer than months they play them less (Markey, Markey, and French 2015). Even when violent video games, like Grand Theft Auto, were first released, there tends to be a decrease in violent crimes (Beerthuizen, Weijters, and van der Laan 2017). These findings have been replicated by psychologists, economists, and sociologists at various universities considering numerous other variables (cf. Cunningham, Engelstätter, and Ward 2016; Ward 2011). Most strikingly, these findings are not unique to violent video game play— other forms of violent media have also been linked to decreases in violent crime. Contrary to the fear that violent television poses a threat to our society, violent assaults, rapes, and murders all decrease when people are watching extremely violent television shows (Messner 1986). Even violent movies have been linked to declines in real-world violence. As with violent video games, years in which the most violent films were released saw decreases in violent crime, and crime consistently decreases in the days following the release of popular violent movies (Dahl and DellaVigna 2009; Markey, French, and Markey 2015). Regardless of the type of violent media—games, movies, or television shows—the research is consistent. When society is exposed to violent media, there is a reliable reduction in real-world violence. The reason why violent video game play (and other violent media) seems to reduce crime can be traced back to what criminologists call “routine activity theory” (Felson 1994). The simple notion behind this theory is this: For a violent crime to occur, a perpetrator must be in the same location as the victim, and this location tends to be free of those who would likely prevent the crime. Now, consider how playing many hours of video games may keep these potential criminals and victims entertained and off the streets. Male gamers in the United States spend a total of 468 million hours each month playing video games (Snider 2014). These hours constitute time during which at-risk individuals remain inside their homes, instead of being out on the streets. In this manner, video game play could serve as an effective crime-reduction strategy. No taxpayer money is needed. It naturally targets those individuals who are at the highest risk for committing violence or being victims of violence, and it appears to be working. Video Game Play and Aggression If you shoot somebody in one of these games, you don’t go to jail, you don’t get penalized in some way—you get extra points! This doesn’t mean that your child will go out into the world and shoot someone. But they do use more aggressive language, they do use more aggressive images, they have less ability to control their anger, and they externalize things in these violent ways. It’s absolutely not good. —“Dr. Phil” McGraw, television personality (2005) As illustrated by Dr. Phil’s quote, although some might not think video games cause violent homicides, they are still willing to believe that video game play, especially violent video game play, causes aggressive behaviors like punching others, fighting, or bullying. In this context, aggressive behaviors are actions committed by an individual intending to harm another individual. Although similar to violent behaviors like homicides, aggressive acts tend not to cause such extreme physical harm (Bushman et al. 2016). Much of the research purporting to support the claim that video games cause more minor forms of aggression has done little more than establish associations between self-reports of video game play and self-reports of feelings. Figure 2 provides some examples researchers have used to examine whether video games cause aggression. As we can see from these items, these studies do not examine real acts of aggression. Instead, these questionnaires attempt to measure aggression by using items that assess whether an individual might be “jerky” (that is, believing that to say something nasty about an individual behind his or her back is acceptable), antisocial, (as in, “I feel unsociable”), gossipy (as in “I have spread gossip about people I do not like”), or—oddly enough—conservative (like someone who might say, “Any nation should be ready with a strong military at all times”) (Krahé and Möller 2004; Anderson and Dill 2000; Greitemeyer 2019; Anderson et al. 2004). Thus, the meaning and importance one can draw from such studies are extremely suspect. When video game researchers have conducted experiments, these studies have typically involved one group of participants who play a violent video game and another group who plays a nonviolent video game. After a short play session, participants’ aggressive thoughts or behaviors are assessed. Some researchers who have used this methodology found that individuals who play violent video games are more likely to expose others to loud irritating noises (Bushman and Gibson 2011), report feeling more hostile on a questionnaire (Anderson and Dill 2000), give longer prison sentences to hypothetical criminals (Deselms and Altman 2003), and even give hot sauce to people who do not like spicy food (Yang, Huesmann, and Bushman 2014). Importantly, many other researchers cannot replicate these effects (Kühn et al. 2019). So, even if these various experimental outcomes might be related to disagreeable thoughts, it is extremely questionable how well these responses translate to real-world aggressive behavior such as fighting, hitting, and bullying. Other scholars have raised both methodological and measurement concerns with studies examining aggression. For instance, one popular method, the competitive reaction time task (CRTT), measures how aggressive a person becomes after playing a violent video game by giving the player a chance to “blast” another person with an irritating noise. Specifically, participants are allowed to select both the duration and the intensity level (on a scale of zero to ten) of a white noise burst administered to another person. Unfortunately, no standardized scoring method exists for this measurement of aggression. Some researchers have scored aggression as the sum of the intensity and duration (Bushman and Gibson 2011), the product of the intensity and duration (Bartholow, Sestir, and Davis 2005), the log-transformation of duration, ignoring the intensity (Anderson and Dill 2000), and even the square root of the duration score multiplied by the intensity score (Carnagey and Anderson 2005). Collectively, there are at least 147 different ways researchers have scored this measurement. Given all these permutations, one can make it appear as if video games increase aggression, decrease aggression, or have no effect on aggression even within the same sample (Elson et al. 2014). Looking past such methodical problems, numerous scholars have conducted meta-analyses to try to understand better how big an effect video games have on these mundane aggressive outcomes. On average, only 0.4 percent to 4 percent of the variance in minor forms of aggression can be explained by violent video games (Ferguson 2015b; Hilgard, Engelhardt, and Rouder 2017). Keep in mind that this small effect is in reference to the effect of video game play on aggressive outcomes with minimal repercussions (e.g., giving hot sauce to another person who does not like spicy foods) that often have methodical issues (e.g., the CRTT) and are not direct measurements of real-world aggressive acts. Thus, the extremely small effect sizes linking violent video games to questionable proxy measurements of aggression found in many studies likely constitute an overestimate of any true effect video game play has on real-world aggressive behaviors.