Class 1: The Purpose of the Corporation (Dodge v. Ford Motor Company)
Dodge v. Ford Motor Company is a great case. It is important because its ruling touches on a
question at the very core of corporate law: what is the purpose of the corporation? Is it exclusively
to make the most money for shareholders? (And if so – making the most money long-term or short-
term?) Or perhaps it is also permissible – or even required – that the corporation would act in the
interests of other stakeholders – employees, creditors, customers, the local community, or the
nation in which it is incorporated?
But there is another reason why Dodge v. Ford Motor Company is a great case: the parties are
pretending to act for reasons different than those that really motivate them. As we will see in class,
the plaintiff and defendant present their interests in ways that don’t make sense once you think
things through. And read narrowly, the court’s decision seems almost arbitrary and in contrast to
established law. But once you understand the entire context, the court ruling can be seen as a
clever way to maintain both the letter and the spirit of established law.
But no case is perfect. The main weakness of Dodge is that it is not well-written; indeed, it is quite
boring to read. Another weakness is that the actual legal question it discusses is a narrow one that
requires knowing some corporate law to understand. Therefore, though I am including the text of
the case for you to read ahead of class, it is not the main assignment and you should not feel
frustrated if it’s not clear to you. I will explain the case in class.
Rather, the main reading assignment ahead of class is an excerpt from an old magazine article,
about an economist you may never have heard about – Friedrich List. I think this is a more
enjoyable reading, and it will give you background for a discussion on the big policy question
Dodge tackles: whose interests should the corporation serve?
No doubt you have heard of Adam Smith and later classical economists who espoused free-market
economics, based on the idea that self-interested behavior by market participants enriches society
as a whole. The line of corporate law doctrine that fits with this worldview is the norm that a
corporation should operate solely for the purpose of its shareholders, and that this would ultimately
benefit all other stakeholders (employees, customers, society as a whole, etc.).
Friedrich List is a leading intellectual force behind an opposing view, which is why I ask that you
read the article to understand the main differences between his world view and that of his free-
market opponents (which he called the “cosmopolitans”). While List is not widely known today,
his work is credited with influencing the thinking of several policy makers and leaders, including
China’s Deng Xiaoping.
In some ways, List appears more relevant to political debate today – with the rise of populist
politicians in several countries including the U.S. – than it was when the article was written. But
in other ways, this article is very much a product of its time. To a contemporary reader it may
appear odd how much Japan and Germany are mentioned in the article compared to other countries
(for example, China). But this was very typical of American policy analysis (and popular culture)
in the 1980s. At that time, the American economy was relatively stagnant, while the economies
of Japan and Germany were booming. The US had a large trade deficit with these countries, with
cheaper German and Japanese imports crowding out a shrinking American industry, and German
and Japanese firms used the dollars they acquired from the deficit to acquire iconic American
assets. The result was fear of those two countries on one hand, and a desire to mimic them on the
other hand. The article is in the tail end of that trend; by the 1990s Japan entered a prolonged
recession, the German economy slowed under the costs of the reunification of West and East
Germany, and the American economy prospered again. You may be more familiar with a
reincarnation of this trend, in the 2000s and early 2010s, this time focused on China.