Context:
Tuberculosis (TB), which is a curable and preventable disease, is the second most common infectious cause of mortality after coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). It affects close to 10 million people per year[1].Despite the diagnosis of TB often being a diagnostic dilemma in kidney disease patients, kidney transplant candidates (KTC) and kidney transplant recipients (KTR) have a 3.62- and 11.35 times higher risk of developing TB, respectively, compared to the general population[2]. They also have a higher rate of mortality due to TB. Treatment of TB also poses unique challenges  in  these patients due to renal dose  modifications,  drug interactions, and nephrotoxicity of anti-tubercular agents.EPIDEMIOLOGYIncidence of TB in dialysis patients and transplant candidatesThe incidence of TB in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) ranges between 60-19, 270 per 100000 population in various countries (highest incidence in the African region and lowest in the Americas), the pooled incidence being 3718 per 100000[3]. In  general, extrapulmonary TB is  more common than pulmonary  TB in this population[2,3]. Amongst patients with CKD, those on dialysis, who are conventionally considered transplant candidates, are at a higher risk of developing TB as compared to earlier stages of CKD. Patients on hemodialysis have a higher incidence than those on peritoneal dialysis (5611/100000 vs 3533/100000 respectively)[3].Incidence of TB in KTRTB incidence is said to be 7-27 times higher than the general population in solid organ transplant recipients[4]. KTR have a 4.59 times higher risk of developing TB compared to the general population[5]. The incidence of TB in KTR was 2700/100000 population in a pooled systemic analysis[3] from across the world with a range of 340-14680/100000[6,7].NATURAL HISTORY OF TB IN TRANSPLANT CANDIDATES AND RECIPIENTSMycobacterium tuberculosis acquisitionThe primary transmission route of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis) is through aerosols, with the lungs being the primary  site  of  host-pathogen  interaction.  The  innate  immune  system  tends  to  clear  the M. tuberculosis bacilli immediately through phagocytosis. However, there is a possibility of the following four distinct outcomes because of complex host-pathogen  interplay[8]:  (1)  Immediate  clearance  of bacilli; (2) Chronic or latent infection; (3)  Rapidly progressive TB; or (4) Reactivation after a prolonged period.Granuloma formationIf the  bacilli are not removed immediately, granulomas  are formed, where inflammatory cells and  cytokines come together and generate a localized response, known as the "Ghon's complex". It includes organ parenchymal involvement along with  regional adenopathy. Effective cell-mediated  immunity usually develops in  4-6 weeks and halts  further infection progression[8].Progression and disseminationWhen the host cannot produce a sufficient cell-mediated immune response, the infection spreads and destroys the tissue. Arterial erosion  promotes hematogenous spread, which  results in disseminated TB that  eventually affects multiple organs.Reactivation and immunosuppressed statesIn immunocompromised states, there may be a reactivation of M. tuberculosis CKD, specifically kidney failure, is one such condition where reactivation of previous infection is the most common cause of TB. Earlier, this reactivation was typically limited to a single organ, the most common site being the upper lobe of the lung[8]. However, now extrapulmonary TB is seen to be more common in these patients. Extrapulmonary involvement can affect various other organs and appear with a myriad of clinical symptoms. Almost every organ being involved has been described, including the musculoskeletal system, gastrointestinal tract, liver, skin, orbit, genitourinary tract,  lymph nodes, pericardium,  larynx, kidneys, and adrenal glands[8,9].
Prasad P et al. TB in kidney transplantationWJT https://www.wjgnet.com 3September 18, 2024 Volume 14 Issue 3Natural history in transplant recipientsBecause of  the  immunosuppression,  the  natural  history of TB infection is more complex in transplant patients.  In developing countries, reactivation from previously acquired infections is more common than re-infection[8,9]. With a median time of onset of 9 months, most active TB cases are recognized during the first year post-transplantation[10-13]. Also, although pulmonary TB is the most common presentation in KTR, they are more likely to develop extrapulmonary TB compared to the general population[12,14,15].MODES OF TRANSMISSIONFor primary prevention, early diagnosis, and prompt treatment, understanding the various modes of transmission of TB is crucial. The various modes of transmission among transplant candidates and recipients are illustrated in Figure 1 and enlisted below[16,17]: (1) Airborne transmission: Aerosol transmission remains the predominant mechanism, particularly in enclosed and congested environments; (2) Reactivation from latent infection: In areas where TB is highly prevalent, reactivation of  latent  TB  is a frequent mechanism of transmission;  (3)  Nosocomial  transmission: The possibility of nosocomial transmission is a worry  in healthcare environments.  Strict infection control procedures are necessary in transplant units, where immunocompromised patients are concentrated, to stop TB from spreading among recipients; (4) Donor-derived transmission:  Rarely, transmission can occur directly  from the donor organ. Thorough  screening  of potential organ donors is essential to avoid unintentionally spreading TB during transplant procedures; and (5) Unusual routes of transmission: Environmental sources have been reported to host viable and infectious TB for long periods. These sources include soil, rivers, wastewater, fomites, dust, and even cadavers. There have been reports of TB transmission through topical wound site contamination, aerosolization during surgery, and intake of water tainted with sanatorium effluent. Also, the incidence of pediatric cases due to intestinal TB is showing an increasing trend, probably due to the ingestion of contaminated milk or sputum[16].Factors influencing transmissionThe probability that an individual with TB will transmit M. tuberculosis to others is determined by many factors, including the number and rate of infectious droplet production and virulence of the disease of the original host who transmits the infection[18]. Environmental factors include duration and extent of contact. Better air circulation and increased ultraviolet (UV) light  exposure  in  the  space of contact decrease the chances of transmission. Host  factors  include  the  type of induction and maintenance immunosuppression among transplant patients[18].