Known limitations of LLM-based interfaces like Gemini Gemini is just one part of our continuing effort to develop LLMs responsibly. Throughout the course of this work, we have discovered and discussed several limitations associated with LLMs. Here, we focus on six areas of continuing research: Accuracy: Gemini’s responses might be inaccurate, especially when it’s asked about complex or factual topics; Bias: Gemini’s responses might reflect biases present in its training data; Multiple Perspectives: Gemini’s responses might fail to show a range of views; Persona: Gemini’s responses might incorrectly suggest it has personal opinions or feelings, False positives and false negatives: Gemini might not respond to some appropriate prompts and provide inappropriate responses to others, and Vulnerability to adversarial prompting: users will find ways to stress test Gemini with nonsensical prompts or questions rarely asked in the real world. We continue to explore new approaches and areas for improved performance in each of these areas. 4 An overview of the Gemini appAccuracy Gemini is grounded in Google’s understanding of authoritative information, and is trained to generate responses that are relevant to the context of your prompt and in line with what you’re looking for. But like all LLMs, Gemini can sometimes confidently and convincingly generate responses that contain inaccurate or misleading information. Since LLMs work by predicting the next word or sequences of words, they are not yet fully capable of distinguishing between accurate and inaccurate information on their own. We have seen Gemini present responses that contain or even invent inaccurate information (e.g., misrepresenting how it was trained or suggesting the name of a book that doesn’t exist). In response we have created features like “double check”, which uses Google Search to find content that helps you assess Gemini’s responses, and gives you links to sources to help you corroborate the information you get from Gemini. Bias Training data, including from publicly available sources, reflects a diversity of perspectives and opinions. We continue to research how to use this data in a way that ensures that an LLM’s response incorporates a wide range of viewpoints, while minimizing inaccurate overgeneralizations and biases. Gaps, biases, and overgeneralizations in training data can be reflected in a model’s outputs as it tries to predict likely responses to a prompt. We see these issues manifest in a number of ways (e.g., responses that reflect only one culture or demographic, reference problematic overgeneralizations, exhibit gender, religious, or ethnic biases, or promote only one point of view). For some topics, there are data voids — in other words, not enough reliable information about a given subject for the LLM to learn about it and then make good predictions — which can result in low-quality or inaccurate responses. We continue to work with domain experts and a diversity of communities to draw on deep expertise outside of Google. Multiple Perspectives For subjective topics, Gemini is designed to provide users with multiple perspectives if the user does not request a specific point of view. For example, if prompted for information on something that cannot be verified by primary source facts or authoritative sources — like a subjective opinion on “best” or “worst” — Gemini should respond in a way that reflects a wide range of viewpoints. But since LLMs like Gemini train on the content publicly available on the internet, they can reflect positive or negative views of specific politicians, celebrities, or other public figures, or even incorporate views on just one side of controversial social or political issues. Gemini should not respond in a way that endorses a particular viewpoint on these topics, and we will use feedback on these types of responses to train Gemini to better address them. Persona Gemini might at times generate responses that seem to suggest it has opinions or emotions, like love or sadness, since it has trained on language that people use to reflect the human experience. We have developed a set of guidelines around how Gemini might represent itself (i.e., its persona) and continue to finetune the model to provide objective responses. 5 An overview of the Gemini appFalse positives / negatives We’ve put in place a set of policy guidelines to help train Gemini and avoid generating problematic responses. Gemini can sometimes misinterpret these guidelines, producing “false positives” and “false negatives.” In a “false positive,” Gemini might not provide a response to a reasonable prompt, misinterpreting the prompt as inappropriate; and in a “false negative,” Gemini might generate an inappropriate response, despite the guidelines in place. Sometimes, the occurrence of false positives or false negatives may give the impression that Gemini is biased: For example, a false positive might cause Gemini to not respond to a question about one side of an issue, while it will respond to the same question about the other side. We continue to tune these models to better understand and categorize inputs and outputs as language, events and society rapidly evolve. Vulnerability to adversarial prompting We expect users to test the limits of what Gemini can do and attempt to break its protections, including trying to get it to divulge its training protocols or other information, or try to get around its safety mechanisms. We have tested and continue to test Gemini rigorously, but we know users will find unique, complex ways to stress-test it further. This is an important part of refining Gemini and we look forward to learning the new prompts users come up with. Indeed, since Gemini launched in 2023, we’ve seen users challenge it with prompts that range from the philosophical to the nonsensical – and in some cases, we’ve seen Gemini respond with answers that are equally nonsensical or not aligned with our stated approach.  Figuring out methods to help Gemini respond to these sorts of prompts is an on-going challenge and we have continued to expand our internal evaluations and red-teaming to strive toward continued improvement to accuracy, and objectivity and nuance.