8 
In section 4 we discussed various tendencies that began to emerge during and after the phase of punctual music. Around 1956 these became much clearer and enabled composers to draw certain conclusions. 
1. The statistical approach to music came to the foreground. The primary consideration became the ordering of higher categories of form rather than the organisation of detail. This was already indicated by use of the term 'group' to refer to what is really the smallest unit, characterised by the detailed effect of pitch, duration, timbre, etc.; within the group, however, a certain freedom was possible without encroaching on the characteristic of the group. This freedom was also evident in an easier use of interval proportions than was ever conceivable in classical dodecaphony. It was no longer a question of 'this and this' or 'so and so many notes, but of a certain degree of density. Density, register, direction of movement, degree of periodicity and many other concepts emerged as aspects of music that could be ordered serially. Attention to elements of detail made way for a more global determination, and thus for the concept of form. 
2. In this process the series became increasingly neutral, functioning more and more as a regulatory factor. Proportions became decisive: a 3rd from a pitch series is a 5/4 proportion that can be manifest in any other musical ele- ment. In so far as pitch series were still employed, they likewise had a neutral character and were naturally no longer bound to the twelve notes. The series in Gruppen still had twelve notes, and indeed a pronounced shape of its own, presumably to attain large proportional contrasts in the macrofield. The Klavierstücke I-IV however, dating from 1954, retained only the rudiments of the 12-note series. In the second and third pieces, respectively, they are as fol- lows: 
Nono's Il Canto sospeso (1956) was based on the all-interval series shown in 
Example 109. Something similiar occurred in Messiaen's Livre d'Orgue (see Example 16). 
3. The outstanding scholar Györgi Ligeti, who has already been mentioned, introduced the concept of interval permeability. In section 4 we have already observed how the interval, and indeed other musical elements too, lost its own existence by being taken up in higher, statistically determinable quanti- ties.4 This desensitisation evoked new problems and new possibilities. The music became manifest in layers, no longer characterised by the detail but by a global 'material state' (rough, granular, smooth, etc.). Such layers could be combined, and exact synchronisation was obviously no longer relevant. Indeed, exactness acquired a certain margin: synchronism was not essential, but rather the spatial distribution of 'material states'. Something of the sort had already been achieved by Messiaen, among others, with his modality, in which a certain indifferentiation likewise arose in terms of sequence of notes and intervals. In serial music composers went further: different tempos were combinable, and the new concept of field magnitude emerged, heralding another important phase in new music that is usually described as aleatory composition. 
9 
This did not appear out of thin air. Directly after the rigorously punctual style of the Structures, Boulez reacted with his Marteau sans Maître, completed in 1954, in which the tempo in particular fluctuates through the many changes, directions such as 'tempo et nuances très instables', etc. The work breathes a freedom and suppleness that reminds one immediately of Debussy. The many short notes, separate or clustered, and the irrational values create a sort of written-out rubato (see Example 35). This differentiation, which was also manifest, though somewhat differently, in Stockhausen's work of the same period, moved the latter to express the following thoughts (freely cited): 'An inaccuracy factor arises in performance. The areas within which this factor is 

manifest are time fields, and their dimensions are field magnitudes. In the past too this margin existed in performance, but was coincidental. Now we wish to capture these inaccuracies functionally. A series of field magnitudes, rather than a traditional series of fixated durations, can now be determinant.' 
This meant the abandonment of our quantitative system of fixed-value notation and the creation of a way of indicating the boundaries within which indeterminacy may occur, something that could be done in many ways. In Example 67 Boulez used the sign to indicate the boundaries within which a number of short notes may be freely placed. Stockhausen developed a different method to indicate action duration, based on the principle that note duration is no longer counted, but determined during performance by means of a particular action prescribed by the composer. Thus, the time between two notes, for instance, may depend on that required by the player to move his hand, on the degree of complexity of a given touch or pedal movement, or on breathing considerations, etc. Once again, such physiolog- ical reactions had always existed; but Stockhausen wished to incorporate them functionally in his music. Although it sounds paradoxical, all this revealed a desire to control musical elements that cannot be accurately com- mitted to paper. It is clear, therefore, that it was not a question of the absolute values of these elements, but of their mutual relationships. 
The rapidity of these innovations was remarkable. While the correspon- dence between macro- and micro-areas discussed in the previous sections was still hardly formulated, new territory was being explored. And each discovery required years of elaboration! Perhaps it was this hurried course of events that caused problems in Stockhausen's first composition in this field. Let us take a closer look at the Klavierstück XI of 1957. 
Nineteen groups are written down on a large piece of paper, all of very dif- ferent length and without any suggestion of sequence; some are illustrated in Example 110. According to the composer each group is in itself the result of serial ordering, based on different series to organise field magnitude propor- tions. We must take his word for it, since we have arrived at a situation in which serial manipulation can no longer be reconstructed without the help of the composer. Some groups include the familiar notes in small print that are to be played as fast as possible'. Action duration is taken into account, for the composer says that 'difficult chords and large leaps with one hand obviously require more time than simple chords and smaller intervals'. Although the notes in normal print have the customary quantitive notation of duration, an unexpected element is to play a role. Stockhausen prescribes the following: the performer is to glance unintentionally at the page and play the first group that catches his eye, in the tempo, dynamics and touch of his choice. The lat- ter, however, are classified by the composer beforehand: there are six tempos, for instance, ranging from tempo I, very fast, to tempo 6, very slow. Subsequently, the player's eye is caught unintentionally (without any attempt to connect particular groups) by another group which he now plays in accor- 

dance with directions given at the end of the previous group. Each group can be connected to any of the other eighteen, and all nineteen groups can there- fore be performed in the prescribed degrees of tempo, dynamics and touch. The characteristics of all groups are therefore variable within the chosen boundaries. The field magnitude of a following group is determined by indi- cations at the end of the preceding one. 
A performance does not necessarily include all the groups. If a group is repeated, indications are given for small modifications in the second render- ing, usually in the form of somewhat elementary octave transpositions. If a group occurs for a third time, it also brings one of the possible realisations of the whole piece to an end. The work is an example of open form, without direction or termination. The groups are spatially juxtaposed and can be com- bined in countless ways. In the many commentaries on this composition two aspects have been neglected or confused. 
1. The action duration - a decidedly positive element. Instead of ‘counting' with a margin of inaccuracy, a spontaneous reaction arises, a realisation of the time structure at the moment of the action itself. Such music can therefore no longer be approached from the score, since the time structure is now deter- mined by the perception time of the performer himself, which is inseparable from physical reactions and abilities. Such freedom is therefore ostensible. Nothing is added to an existing structure (unlike jazz or basso continuo tech- nique); on the contrary, the player remains entirely bound to the composer's directions, but he becomes involved right down to his physical reactions. Notice that this action duration takes place within the boundaries of each group. The mutual bond between the groups is quite a different matter; it is created by means of what one could call: 
2. the spontaneous decision. The player is required to glance 'unintention- ally' and to link the very first group that catches his eye with the preceding one. The word 'chance' crops up here and is indeed to stay with us, whether relevant or not. But it is not a question of chance, for the performer may choose from no more than the 18 options determined by the composer. All possibilities are already enclosed in the concept. At best there is mention of an unconsidered decision at the last moment - freedom, indeed, but a free- dom without sense. The actual time experience of the action duration is absent, as is the considered decision of the composition process. It is a free- dom that is only possible thanks to another concept of form, that of the open form without causality. These new concepts of form have already been dis- cussed at several points, especially in relation to the theory of musical space. In this light Stockhausen's Klavierstück XI is hardly new, but merely a confir- mation of a concept of form already found in Debussy. 
Stockhausen's step was to transfer choice from the composer to the per- former; instead of a single notated version, many realisations of a piece become feasible. 

- 
Boulez was the first to recognise the real problem of the Klavierstück XI. In the same period, but independently of Stockhausen, he worked on his Third Piano Sonata; at the same time he was confronted by the work of Mallarmé, whose literary preoccupations ran remarkably parallel despite the great dis- parity in time. In Boulez, too, the player gains a more important role, but this does nothing 
the composer believes - to change the problem of form. He felt the necessity to develop a new form that adapts to the material available to the serial composer, which was constantly becoming more elastic. But form to Boulez was something more than the mosaics of Stockhausen's music, which were really nothing other than constantly changing combinations from millions of options. If the performer was free to choose, then his choice should preferably be made after some consideration, and with only a very lim- ited number of possibilities that were precisely determined by the composer. 
An example is the overall structure of the Sonata (comprising five move- ments in the first concept): Antiphonie, Trope, Constellation, Strophe, Séquence. The sequence of the movements is free, providing that Constellation is always in the middle. The internal structure reflects the same approach. One of the movements, Trope, has four components: two so-called structures complexes (Parenthèse, Commentaire) and two structures simples (Glose, Texte). In the 'complex structures' the performer is again free to include or omit certain additional variants (given between brackets). 
The sequence of these components is indicated in an ingenious manner. The unnumbered pages of the score are in a ring binder, and the player may begin where he wishes. The sequence is therefore directed - we usually read from front to back - but not predetermined (Boulez speaks of a forme circu- laire). There are normally four options, therefore, depending on the starting point: 
- 
P, C, C, 
G, T 
G, T, P G, T, P C 
T, P, C, G 
But since the Commentaire section is included twice, four other possibilities become available, depending on where this section is placed (it may only be performed once); this can be represented as in Figure 7. Altogether eight dif- ferent sequences are therefore available; compared to the millions in Stockhausen, this illustrates just how much more control the composer has retained over the final outcome. 
The Trope from Boulez's Third Piano Sonata provided only a first and simple answer to the new problems of form. Although the composer already estab- lished new structural concepts, the territory as such was as yet hardly explored. This is particularly evident if we bear in mind that the free sequence 
of sections, which caused the most sensation in the beginning, was merely one aspect of the complex concept of form that awaited exploitation. 
However the case may be, through these preoccupations, form acquired unprecedented autonomy, despite the astonishing authority granted (for the time being) to the performer. This is already observed in the work of Mallarmé, who concentrated far more on the structure of language than on its significance, or, in other words, attempted to convert this significance into a symbolism of absolute value. Form had a life of its own, bringing the artist to an attitude of anonymity, since the intrusion of purely personal incidents was undesirable. Those with some knowledge of Asian culture will hardly be surprised by this. But in Europe relationships are different, and particularly for those less gifted than Boulez it is fitting to recall the words of Paul Valéry, a confidant of Mallarmé. Concerning the latter's ambitions he spoke later (in his Lettre sur Mallarme) of 'diviniser la chose écrite' (divining that which is written). But, he went on, 'ce n'est point l'œuvre faite et ses apparences ou ses effets dans le monde qui peuvent nous accomplir et nous édifier, mais seule- ment la manière dont nous l'avons faite (it is not the finished work and its appearances, or its effects on the world, which can fulfill and edify us, but only the manner in which we have accomplished it). 
IO 
The concept of aleatory music has now broadened considerably, and we must certainly mention one other composer under this heading. 
We have already examined two aspects: action duration and the sponta- neous decision in Stockhausen, and intervention possibilities in Boulez. In the latter the performer is like a driver who may choose from a limited num- ber of roads, while the road map itself remains the domain of the town plan- ner. Boulez described Stockhausen's solution as chance, while Stockhausen used the term gelenkter Zufall (guided chance); but as we have seen, in reali- ty the element of chance was less present than one might imagine. All this only made the problem of form most acute, and the composer who was to draw particularly radical conclusions was the American John Cage. Cage came to Europe in 1958 - I remember a momentous concert at the World Exhibition in Brussels - and was quick to cause the necessary stir. From his 
point of view our controversy between tonality and atonality was long out- dated. He believed that modern serialists kept far too much to traditional paths, exposing themselves to a constant risk of academicism. 
A number of similarities, however, can also be found. Like Boulez, Cage's music reveals a pursuit of objectivity, or rather anonymity, which helps the sound to 'come to itself'. But his conclusions were much more radical. Instead of trying to bind the notes, his school attempted to soak off their adhesive, formed as it was by centuries of convention. If one hangs on to the notes, if one has 'musical' ideas, one cannot allow the notes to be themselves. And 'being themselves' means that there is no superimposed expression. (Many modern composers would go along with him up to this point, and the much older Varèse, with his 'liberation of the sound', was even a precursor.) And it also means that there is no man-made organisation. Thus, Cage reached a conclusion diametrically opposed to our early serialists: not com- plete determination, but rather complete indetermination was essential. (One of the most shocking experiences of recent times is to discover that both points of departure lead to the same degree of indetermination.) In order to achieve this indetermination, Cage used to make particular use of chance actions such as the tossing of coins, etc. Other means may also be employed, such as the oracle of the staves from the ancient Chinese book I-Ching (which illustrates the influence of Zen Buddhism on this composer), or mathemati- cal methods. 
More recently, however, the accent has shifted towards the unforeseeable- ness of the performance itself, involving the actual performers. It is remark- able how completely different paths form striking parallels with modern European composers! Fifty years earlier Charles Ives, following quite a differ- ent line of thought, created the same sort of music as that of the young Schönberg and Stravinsky. Despite the shift towards live performance, a score was naturally still required as an instruction for the players. But the score must not be viewed as a ready-made, notated form. And this is where Cage differs: the composition is not an autonomous object, but a performance process. Obviously, this process has its boundaries - determined by the action of the players and by a number of characteristics - but essentially the music has no precedence above either note or noise. While it does have its own exis- tence, it remains 'transparent' in relation to its surroundings. Its boundaries become diffuse, and counting is not required, for we exist in time'. Stopwatches rather than bars serve to indicate when an occurrence of sound must take place within this time. Christian Wolff, a composer from the Cage group, replaced Stockhausen's eye ('unintentional glancing') with the ear: cer- tain occurrences of sound, caused by the one player, evoke reactions from the other (Duo for Pianists II). The outcome is determined by the performers themselves; finally, musical form may be conceived as 'the length of the pro- gramme'.7 
Cage is among those Westerners who have listened to the Japanese bow- 

8 
man in chapter 6. Just how far his interpretation is correct, we will leave to the experts. Is this still music? Surely we see an influence on contemporary music that cannot be underestimated. Can everybody do the same? But not everybody does, is Cage's reply. Strong differences of opinion emerge. It is impossible to imagine the fascinating whirlpool of new developments with- out Cage. Whether the music comes from inside or outside, we cannot escape it. 
'One day when the windows were open, Christian Wolff played one of his pieces at the piano. Sounds of traffic, boat horns, were heard not only during the silences in the music but, being louder, were more easily heard than the piano sounds themselves. Afterwards, someone asked Christian Wolff to play the piece again with the windows closed. Christian Wolff said he'd be glad to, but that it wasn't really necessary, since the sounds of the environment were in no sense an interruption of those of the music.' 
II 
The above discussion helps us to clarify the concept of aleatory music. It is a generic term for all aspects of music that are not predetermined. The rela- tionship between determined and undetermined elements plays a role in all types of music. The undetermined element brings unforeseeableness with it, and can occur both in performance and during the process of composition. 
Unforeseeableness can be manifest in differing degrees. In the perform- ance of a classical composition, for example, the degree to which the fixated notation can be deviated from is limited. Performance of a piece by John Cage, on the other hand, can involve a high degree of unforeseeableness. But even here general patterns of expectation can be formulated. 
Finally, with regard to developments in the music of the period 1950-60, the following aspects are of importance: 
more 
1. In Cage's work the element of chance to use this dubious word once - was a means to obtain indetermination and to escape from the human grasp of the music. Young European composers, on the other hand, were con- cerned with gaining even stricter control of the musical material: even this indeterminable area of free choice was consciously incorporated in the of composition. 
process 
2. Bearing in mind changing concepts of musical form, we can say that part of what once belonged to the individual and 'unique' work of art is now ascribed to the material employed by the performers. There is a certain incli- nation to make matters absolute, which corresponds logically to the excessive attention given to musical material that we have observed from 1950 onwards. 3. Expansionism, moreover, is not foreign to serial technique, in the sense that there is an inclination to exploit all the possibilities of the chosen mate- rial. The limited means of dodecaphony of the past have been extended to 

become an all-embracing permutation procedure; it soon became apparent, however, that this again was not sufficient to harness the wealth of resources that had been rallied. A written serial score realises only a few of the count- less possibilities, and the free choice of the performer can at least compensate this to a certain extent. The element of chance becomes a wider margin in the realisation of the (unforeseeable) permutation process. Far from coincidental is the attendant departure from the unique, once-and-for-all determined work of art. A remarkable dichotomy seems to arise between the realised con- dition of a single work of art and the 'possibly realisable' that is potentially present in the same. Here creative expansionism collides with ultimate boundaries. 
4. The element of chance can serve to fill another gap. With all due respect for their sometimes brilliant ideas, one can nonetheless consider that both Stockhausen and Boulez have maintained an only too simple notion of the role of what they call 'surprise' in the musical process. The former wrote: "The degree of information is therefore at its highest when at any point in a musi- cal discourse the moment of surprise is at its strongest: the music constantly has "something to say". (Just before this he specifies: 'Surprise only occurs when the unexpected happens.')" Boulez shares this opinion: "... for any music that is a masterpiece is a music that allows the capacity to surprise at any moment. 
This is not the place to contradict these ideas, but it is clear that from this point of view too, the involvement of the spontaneous decision of the per- former is most welcome: the 'surprise' within the boundaries of a work may increase, and the same goes for each subsequent performance. 
5. Increasing differentiation posed considerable problems with regard to traditional notation, which was not at all equal to its task. By involving the performer, this difficulty was eased on the one hand, while on the other new symbols had to be introduced to indicate players' actions. It was inevitable that this issue also had to be tackled once more, as is described in section 14. 
12 
In the reaction against abstractions, serial music lost more and more influence after 1960. Boulez has remained a bastion of serial academicism, but Stockhausen has changed enormously. He is no longer the great renewer, but continues to react with great flexibility to any external stimulus that he encounters. He is long past the stage of solving problems of form and tech- nique. From Carré (1960) and Originale (1961) onwards his work comprises. ever more heterogeneous elements including happenings, pop, quotations, indeterminate sound production (contact microphones), etc. 
The use of contact microphones has now become very widespread, and this opens up a new direction in the application of electronic resources. In days past, electronic music was accurately recorded on tape in a studio. Many 
considered this an advantage: the composer exercised maximum control, while the inconstancies of live performance were eliminated. But this strict view could not be maintained, and in a next step (discussed in section 9) aleatory techniques were introduced, at first very cautiously among Europeans but after 1960 much more freely. Improvisation groups even appeared on stage working with electronic apparatus. The principle is simple: microphones attached to 'instruments' (that may or may not be recognisable as such) pick up vibrations that are normally neither audible nor usable and feed them to loudspeakers via amplifiers and possibly modulators. A new and hitherto unknown world of sound is brought to life. Unexpected surprises may occur too, and with them an immediate response from the performer. This was a typical feature of the post-1960 period. 
exper- 
Once again it was Cage who led the way with such experiments. More important, however, was his awareness of the situation. For in his first iments with chance phenomena he discovered that he was still attempting to drag 'successful' results out of chance actions. Realising later on that this atti- tude was equivocal, he came to accept the induced results of chance. The result was no longer important, but rather the attitude of open-mindedness. Thus, he came to distinguish between chance actions and indetermination. In the first case the composer employs chance as a means, but to a limited degree such that he remains within a self-determined global circle. Indetermination, on the contrary, exceeds this circle: the result is in every respect indefinite; such music crops up out of time, undefined and inciden- tal, only to disappear once more without a trace. All things are interrelated,' Cage said, and taken up in the stream of time. Any (human) pursuit of a stat- ed "aim" is a simplification, and a departure from reality.' The lessons of Cage were developed further by an American ‘second generation' around 1960. And once again the aesthetic consequences of the concept of indetermination were applied more radically than in Europe. In the work of La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Robert Ashley and the Fluxus Movement, almost all existing values and concepts relating to music were turned well and truly upside down. 
La Monte Young (1935) worked with long chains of chords that developed systematically. His material is economical, and naturally comprises all that is 'sound', including that produced by nature, machines, and electronic resources. Performances may last a week or more and incorporate other ele- ments such as light, movement and theatre. His contemporary Terry Riley followed the same course. His music consists of long chains of repeated motifs, usually in elementary diatonic note patterns. Tape loops and feedback systems provide the characteristic tone colours; electronic and instrumental resources merge. These and other Americans shared a broad interest in wide- ly different idioms including jazz, pop and non-Western music. 
Chance action - indetermination: many composers throughout the world now work within these borders. Only few are conscious of the background so brilliantly evoked by Cage in his writings. What is clear, however, is that serial concepts are disappearing; there is a growing reaction to their abstrac- tions and a tendency towards greater directness in music making. This is also expressed in the instrumental works of Berio, Ligeti, Kagel and others: music that is tailor-made for certain specialists, musicians who are required to make a creative contribution of their own rather than only faithfully reproduce a more or less authoritarian score. Such music renounces serial, abstractly deter- mined sound differentiation in favour of a more direct form of expression. Not only the actual notes, but sighs, scratches, shouts and moans become part of music making. The instrument literally becomes an extension of the human body. 
Similar tendencies are found in music theatre. This rather vague term embodies so much variety that a comprehensive definition can hardly be given. In general, it can be viewed as a reaction to traditional theatrical and operatic forms, which have caused the nineteenth century to live on, leaving current issues to the realm of film. The 'raree show' idea has also been aban- doned, since divisions between audience and stage, between different partic- ipating disciplines, required abolition. Various directions emerged, from the political engagement of Nono (Intolleranza, 1960) to the more light-hearted or autonomous approach of Kagel (Sur Scène, 1960) and Ligeti (Aventures, 1962). Nono connected with traditional opera, while Ligeti created a 'com- position with scenic, verbal and musical means'. Unlike the traditional Gesamtkunstwerk there is a tendency to grant the incorporated elements a life of their own, independent of one another and only joined by a common peri- od of time. Once again, vocal and instrumental techniques are extended to such a degree that the two flow together. 
All such innovations amount to repeated attempts to break through exist- ing boundaries! From the beginning of the twentieth century, the failure of instrument making to keep pace with musical developments made itself increasingly felt. Factories were usually highly industrialised, geared to the mass production of traditional instruments and leaving no room for altruis- tic research in an artistic sense. Today's composer must still make do with instruments developed hundreds of years ago: thus the continual expansion of playing techniques towards the boundaries of human endeavour; thus the contact microphones; and thus the ongoing specialisation of the few players devoted exclusively to new music. 