In the health area, a habitual behavior is observed among professionals of using knowledge about diseases and treatments (generating authority) over the passivity of those who need care – the patient (perpetuating dependence) – and this marks a strong characteristic of paternalism. For many professionals, it is difficult to assess an individual’s ability to decide on an indication based on clinical and laboratory evaluation. Often, there is still a very strong belief in professional knowledge as sovereign1.Involving patients in decision-making helps professionals ensure that the treatment provided reflects their preferences and values. Ethics, here understood as a reflection on moral and deontological norms and rules and the values  that should guide how professionals should behave, is essential to the practice of health care, and respect for patient autonomy is present in the professions’ codes of ethics. Patients must have the exercise of their autonomy fully guaranteed. Thus, all information must be presented, allowing this autonomy to be exercised2-5.It is recommended that professionals make decisions considering clinical, epidemiological, psychosocial and ethical aspects, never forgetting that these complement each other. With this in mind, it is necessary to consider that competencies can be understood as the skills and knowledge that are acquired throughout training. When we talk about healthcare professionals, understanding the user’s role in decision-making is a competency that needs to be acquired by everyone. Thus, we must remember that the logic of training in the dierent specialties in some health courses, such as medicine, nursing and nutrition, including specialization in Nephrology, is focused on the idea of clinical skills, that is, education acts as a teaching guide for including the professionals into the work process, but often it does not work as Paideia (broad, holistic training with cultural identity) and perpetuates the status quo of technical, procedure-centered training5-7.The vision of skills has been changing daily, as the place of study has expanded. As authors have suggested, there is a need for training that understands the reality of the population, and not just the constant identification of diseases and pre-determined treatments. In this sense, providing the training of reflective professionals who are less attentive to the closed content of the disciplines, developing autonomy, focusing on learning to learn and the student’s protagonism, with the aim of creating care practices that go beyond the strict needs of a population that has a specific characteristic, and yes, the look at the extramural scenario that society presents6-7.Most schools that train health specialties rely on educational methods that support technological logic, focusing on imaging and equipment, dispensing with or makinglearning about interpersonal relationships a secondary aspect. The work of the dierent professionals who comprise the team must be orchestrated and aligned, to present a relationship with the user that directs the team’s form and action. The construction of knowledge occurs through collective lines of force, especially when we are talking about health care6,8. When thinking about strategies to improve professional training, we must look at the national curricular guidelines (DCN, Diretrizes Curriculares Nacionais) for undergraduate courses in the health area. Since 2001, the articulation between the training of professionals and the field of health practice has been presented as necessary and essential. The resolutions show the need to promote graduates capable of working in the promotion, prevention, recovery and rehabilitation of health, through generalist, humanist, critical and reflective training to work with quality, competence and respecting the principles of ethics/bioethics, noting that health care goes beyond the technical act of care, requiring the resolution of individual and collective health problems. It is worth noting that the same is expected in the competency matrix for the training of nephrology specialists.