Application of HIPAA Requirements to Health Care
Providers During the COVID-19 Emergency
Although health care providers must typically comply with HIPAA’s requirements, HHS has said it will
use its enforcement discretion to provide temporary relief in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As
detailed in this Report, federal agencies enjoy discretion in deciding whether to bring enforcement
actions, and courts generally decline to review such decisions. Given this discretion, the HHS OCR has
announced that during the COVID-19 public health emergency it is “exercising its enforcement
discretion” not to enforce the HIPAA rules against health care providers providing telehealth services in
good faith.
In its notice of enforcement discretion, OCR explained that health care providers may use “non-public
facing audio or video communications products” such as “Apple FaceTime, Facebook Messenger video
chat, Google Hangouts video, Zoom, or Skype” without the risk that OCR will seek a penalty for HIPAA
Congressional Research Service 4
LSB10490· VERSION 1 · NEW
non-compliance. OCR encourages providers to notify patients of the potential privacy risks of these
platforms, and also to enable all privacy modes and encryption where available. OCR noted, however,
that health care providers who seek “additional privacy protections” should provide such services through
technology vendors that are HIPAA compliant and will enter into business associate contracts. It
identified several vendors—such as Skype for Business, Zoom for Healthcare, and Google G Suite
Hangouts Meet—who have represented that they are HIPAA compliant and willing to enter into business
associate contracts, although OCR disclaimed that it was validating any of the vendors’ HIPAA
compliance. OCR said, however, that health care providers should not use public-facing services such as
“Facebook Live, Twitch, TikTok,” and similar “public-facing” applications, and it further explained in a
separate publication that use of these services could be evidence of “bad faith” subject to enforcement.
OCR’s notice of enforcement discretion does not have an expiration date, and OCR has said that it will
notify the public when it no longer applies.
DOJ, unlike OCR, has not declared that it will refrain from exercising its criminal enforcement
authority during the COVID-19 emergency. Consequently, individuals may still be liable for
“knowingly” obtaining or disclosing PHI in violation of HIPAA’s requirements. However, while
OCR did not address criminal liability in its notice of enforcement discretion, it might choose not
to refer cases to DOJ for criminal prosecution that involve a health care provider relying in good
faith on OCR’s notice of enforcement discretion.