Montana’s TikTok legislation prompted substantial public commentary. According to the law’s preamble,
SB 419 supports the “health and safety of Montanans” by preventing TikTok’s operation in the state and
also expresses concerns about TikTok’s parent company being subject to control by the People’s Republic
of China (PRC), gathering of user information, and “dangerous content.” (The broader policy issues
related to the legislation are beyond the scope of this Sidebar.)
TikTok and several of its users filed suit in federal district court following passage of the law. TikTok’s
complaint asserted violations of several constitutional rights and provisions (the prohibition against bills
of attainder, the Commerce Clause, the First Amendment, and the Supremacy Clause). Other challengers,
comprising TikTok creators and users, made similar arguments. The court found the plaintiffs’ arguments
compelling, concluding they likely would succeed on the merits. The court determined that the plaintiffs
established irreparable harm to their business interests and granted the preliminary injunction, which
prevented SB 419 from taking effect until the court’s final resolution of the case.

Issues Presented to the Ninth Circuit on Appeal
Attorneys for Montana unsuccessfully argued to the district court that the law represents a valid exercise
of Montana’s police power, that it does not violate any of the claimed constitutional provisions, that
federal law does not preempt the ban, and that the ban would have only an indirect, and thus permissible,
effect on interstate commerce. Montana then appealed the district court’s order granting the preliminary
injunction to the Ninth Circuit.
In its opening brief, Montana asserts that SB 419 has a “common sense consumer protection purpose” and
that the district court erred in concluding that TikTok and its users would win their constitutional
arguments. Montana also argues that the district court erred in its application of the remaining preliminary
injunction factors. A selection of Montana’s various arguments, ordered as they appear in the brief,
follows:
• Police Powers. Montana asserts that protecting consumers is an exercise of police power,
under which states have significant discretion.
• Data Access. Montana asserts that, based on news reports, the U.S. user data that TikTok
collects likely is available to the PRC at will, underscoring that the Montana legislature
enacted SB 419 to protect Montana consumers’ data privacy, not to impact the editorial
control of the platform.
• Burden Shifting. Montana asserts that the district court, in concluding that TikTok and
its users would prevail on their constitutional claims, erroneously shifted the evidentiary
burden for proving those claims to Montana.