3/8/24, 11:07 AM OpenAI Charter
https://openai.com/charter 1/5
Our Charter describes the principles we use to execute on OpenAI’s mission.
OpenAI Charter
3/8/24, 11:07 AM OpenAI Charter
https://openai.com/charter 2/5
Published
April 9, 2018
This document reflects the strategy we’ve refined over the past two years, including feedback from many people
internal and external to OpenAI. The timeline to AGI remains uncertain, but our Charter will guide us in acting in
the best interests of humanity throughout its development.
3/8/24, 11:07 AM OpenAI Charter
https://openai.com/charter 3/5
OpenAI’s mission is to ensure that artificial general intelligence (AGI)—by which we mean highly autonomous
systems that outperform humans at most economically valuable work—benefits all of humanity. We will attempt
to directly build safe and beneficial AGI, but will also consider our mission fulfilled if our work aids others to
achieve this outcome. To that end, we commit to the following principles:
Broadly distributed benefits
We commit to use any influence we obtain over AGI’s deployment to ensure it is used for the benefit of all, and to
avoid enabling uses of AI or AGI that harm humanity or unduly concentrate power.
Our primary fiduciary duty is to humanity. We anticipate needing to marshal substantial resources to fulfill our
mission, but will always diligently act to minimize conflicts of interest among our employees and stakeholders
that could compromise broad benefit.
Long-term safety
We are committed to doing the research required to make AGI safe, and to driving the broad adoption of such
research across the AI community.
We are concerned about late-stage AGI development becoming a competitive race without time for adequate
safety precautions. Therefore, if a value-aligned, safety-conscious project comes close to building AGI before we
do, we commit to stop competing with and start assisting this project. We will work out specifics in case-by-case
agreements, but a typical triggering condition might be “a better-than-even chance of success in the next
two years.”
Technical leadership
To be effective at addressing AGI’s impact on society, OpenAI must be on the cutting edge of AI capabilities—
policy and safety advocacy alone would be insufficient.
We believe that AI will have broad societal impact before AGI, and we’ll strive to lead in those areas that are
directly aligned with our mission and expertise.
Cooperative orientation
We will actively cooperate with other research and policy institutions; we seek to create a global community
working together to address AGI’s global challenges.
We are committed to providing public goods that help society navigate the path to AGI. Today this includes
publishing most of our AI research, but we expect that safety and security concerns will reduce our traditional
publishing in the future, while increasing the importance of sharing safety, policy, and standards research.
Menu
3/8/24, 11:07 AM OpenAI Charter
https://openai.com/charter 4/5
Research API
ChatGPT Company
OpenAI © 2015 – 2024 Social
Overview
Index
GPT-4
DALL·E 3
Sora
Overview
Pricing
Docs
Overview
Team
Enterprise
Pricing
Try ChatGPT
About
Blog
Careers
Charter
Security
Customer stories
Safety
Terms & policies
Privacy policy
Brand guidelines
Twitter
YouTube
GitHub
SoundCloud
LinkedIn
Back to top
3/8/24, 11:07 AM OpenAI Charter
https://openai.com/charter 5/5