Recent State Laws Differ in Their Restrictions
State laws differ in their approaches and requirements. For example, some states enacted information-
gathering laws that mandate disclosure of, or require studies on, foreign ownership of U.S. land. Other
laws directly prohibit certain transactions and may require divestiture of foreign-owned land. Some
restrictions apply only to agricultural land; others to land near military installations, critical infrastructure,
or economically valuable sites; and others to all real property within the state.
State laws also vary as to which groups are subject to land ownership restrictions. Some seek to regulate
real property transactions with individuals and entities from a list of named countries. Others aim to
govern purchases by all non-U.S. citizens. Another set addresses purchases by individuals and entities
from countries identified on lists maintained under federal law, such as the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations (Tables 1 and 2 of 22 C.F.R. § 126); the foreign adversaries list generated under Executive
Order 13873 and its implementing regulations; sanctions lists maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC) in the Department of the Treasury; or countries of particular concern designated by the
U.S. Secretary of State.

SB 264 Creates Two Sets of Restrictions on Land Ownership in Florida
Florida’s law, SB 264 (codified at Florida Statutes §§ 692.201–.205), effective July 1, 2023, creates two
sets of land ownership restrictions. The first set applies to foreign principals connected with foreign
countries of concern (defined as China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, Cuba, the Venezuelan regime of Nicolás Maduro, and Syria). Foreign principals are defined as the foreign governments themselves,
certain corporate and political bodies, and individuals domiciled in the countries of concern who are not
U.S. citizens or lawful permanent residents. Individuals and entities in these groups cannot acquire or own
agricultural land in Florida or real property within 10 miles of a military installation or critical
infrastructure facility in the state.
SB 264’s second set of restrictions applies only to certain individuals and entities connected with the
People’s Republic of China (PRC)—the PRC itself, certain political bodies and individual members of the
PRC or the Communist Party of China, companies organized under PRC law or that have their principal
place of business there, and individuals domiciled in the PRC who are not U.S. citizens or lawful
permanent residents. These PRC-connected individuals and entities cannot purchase any real property in
Florida, absent an exception.
Both sets of restrictions exempt de minimis investments in some securities or companies registered with
the Securities and Exchange Commission. Individuals with nontourist visas or who have been granted
asylum may also purchase one parcel up to 2 acres in size that is not within 5 miles of a military
installation. Preexisting land owners that acquired their property before SB 264 became effective can
continue to own their parcels, but they cannot buy additional land unless permitted by law. SB 264
requires all foreign principals—both existing owners and new purchasers—to register land ownership
with state officials if the parcel is within 10 miles of a military installation or critical infrastructure. Some
PRC-connected individuals and entities must register regardless of the parcel’s location.