**Innovations in Hepatitis C Screening and Treatment**
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major public health threat worldwide, with approximately 71 million people living with chronic infection.( 1 , 2 ) The approval of direct‐acting antivirals (DAAs) starting in 2014 revolutionized treatment and allows nearly all patients to be cured.( 3 ) The number of individuals initiating HCV treatment has increased from approximately 500,000 in 2014 to over 2 million in 2017.( 4 ) In 2016, the World Health Organization called for HCV to be eliminated as a global public health threat by 2030, setting a goal of reducing new infections by 90%, treating 80% of chronic infections, and reducing mortality by 65%.( 5 )

However, few countries are on track to reaching these HCV elimination targets. Globally, only 19% of chronically infected individuals report being aware of their infection, and 15.3% had been treated with DAAs by the end of 2017.( 1 ) In the United States, HCV remains the most common bloodborne infection, affecting 2 million people,( 2 ) and in 2016, more than half of individuals reported being unaware of their infection.( 6 ) HCV‐related mortality continues to rise, surpassing the combined total of 60 other nationally notifiable infectious conditions, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).( 2 , 7 , 8 , 9 ) The United States Preventive Services Task Force, the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently updated their guidelines to recommend universal HCV testing among adults.( 10 , 11 )

The 2020 standard of HCV care has evolved toward universal screening and treatment.( 12 ) However, there is currently a considerable drop‐off between each step of the HCV “cascade to cure,” from screening, diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, cure, prevention of reinfection, and care for cirrhosis (Fig. 1).( 13 ) Low rates of diagnosis result in even lower rates of treatment and ultimately cure. Innovation can help address major barriers in these steps to move us toward HCV elimination (Fig. 2). In this review, we focus on a combination of barriers at the system, provider, and patient level, with an emphasis on how system‐level and provider‐level enhancements are critical in overcoming what have traditionally been deemed patient‐level barriers. Since the interferon era, there has been focus on persons living with HCV in silos, some with blame and consequently stigma for their behaviors, when it is system‐level and provider‐level policies and practices that have presented as barriers that need to be addressed. Implementing interventions tailored toward “hardly reached” populations, the micro‐elimination approach, is a key strategy for achieving HCV elimination.( 14 , 15 ) They complement population‐level macro‐elimination programs. Herein, we highlight interventions that address the HCV cascade to cure in hardly reached populations, including (1) persons who inject drugs (PWIDs) and persons who are marginally housed; (2) correctional populations; and (3) women who are pregnant (Table 1). We hope readers can conceptualize members of these groups as being underserved by traditional engagement efforts, rather than as people with inherent qualities that make them challenging to engage and treat. We also discuss broader efforts to use innovation to eliminate HCV across health systems and countries. The interventions in this review specifically improve screening, case finding, linkage to care (broadly defined as strategies that lead to access to HCV care), treatment delivery and/or adherence, and cure.