5756Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
Adult & Aging Brain 8Adult & Aging Brain8
memory, which requires a high degree
of synaptic plasticity. The loss of thin
dendritic spines could impair neuro-
nal communication and contribute
to cognitive decline. So far, direct
evidence of their role in cognitive
decline is lacking, and more studies
are needed.
Finally, the formation of new
neurons also declines with age.
Although neurogenesis was once
believed to halt after birth, we now
know of two brain regions that con-
tinue to add new neurons through-
out life: the olfactory bulbs and the
dentate gyrus of the hippocampus.
Studies suggest that the rate of neu-
rogenesis plummets with age in mice,
but recent human studies suggest a
more modest decline. It is not yet
clear whether neurogenesis apprecia-
bly affects cognition in the aging hu-
man brain, but mouse studies indicate
that strategies that boost neurogenesis
can enhance cognitive function.
Chemical Changes
The amount of neurotransmit-
ters and the number of their recep-
tors might also decline with age.
Several studies have reported that
less dopamine is synthesized in the
aged brain, and there are fewer re-
ceptors to bind the neurotransmitter.
Less robust evidence indicates that
the amount of serotonin might also
decline with age.
WHY DOES THE BRAIN AGE?
From cortical thinning to the
loss of dendritic spines, you’ve
seen how the brain ages. But what
causes these changes? Many different
theories have been advanced to
explain why neurons, and cells in
general, age. One possibility is that
changes in gene expression play a role.
Researchers have found that genes
important for synaptic plasticity are
expressed less in the brains of older
people than in the brains of younger
adults. The underexpressed genes also
showed more signs of damage.
Oxidative Stress
and DNA Damage
DNA damage that accumulates
over a lifetime could contribute
to aging processes throughout the
brain and body, and DNA damage
due to oxidative stress has received a
great deal of attention. Every cell in
your body contains organelles called
mitochondria, which function a bit
like cellular power plants, carrying
out chemical reactions that provide
energy for cell use. Some of these
metabolic reactions produce harmful
byproducts called free radicals, highly
reactive molecules which, if left un-
checked, can destroy fats and proteins
vital to normal cell function and can
damage DNA as well.
Your body has natural defense
mechanisms to neutralize free radi-
cals. Unfortunately, these mechanisms
decline with age, leaving aging tissues
more vulnerable to oxidative damage
by the free radicals. Studies of brain
cells have shown that damage to their
mitochondrial DNA accumulates with
age. In addition, the brains of people
with mild cognitive impairment and
Alzheimer’s disease show more signs
of oxidative damage than the brains of
healthy people. Studies in rodents also
link increased oxidative damage to
memory impairments.
Your brain is one of the most
metabolically active organs, demand-
ing around 20 percent of the body’s
fuel. Its enormous energy require-
ments might make the brain even
more vulnerable than other tissues
to the metabolic changes that occur
in aging. While the brain’s energy
demands remain high, its energy
supply can no longer keep pace; the
brain’s ability to take up and use glu-
cose diminishes and mitochondrial
metabolism declines.
Immune Dysfunction
Immune dysfunction often occurs
in conjunction with the metabolic
changes seen in aging. Microglia, the
brain’s resident immune cells, per-
form many important jobs: defending
against pathogens, cleaning up cellular
debris, and helping maintain and re-
model synapses. These inflammatory
responses are protective, but a pro-
longed inflammatory state is harmful
to brain health. Microglia become
more reactive with age, increasing the
inflammatory response in the brain
while also damping production of
helpful anti-inflammatory molecules.
Mouse studies suggest that excessive
microglial activity also contributes to
cognitive impairments.
Impaired Protein Recycling
We know that excessive buildup
of abnormal proteins in the brain
contributes to age-related neurode-
generative diseases like Alzheimer’s
and Parkinson’s. Buildup of proteins
and other cell components can also
contribute to cellular degeneration
in the healthy brain. Cells normally
break down and recycle damaged
proteins and molecules, using a pro-
cess that is usually efficient but not
perfect. Over time, damaged mole-
cules can build up in cells and prevent
them from functioning normally.
Because neurons in the brain are not
replaced as often as cells in other
parts of the body (for example, bone
marrow, intestinal lining, hair folli-
cles), brain cells might be even more
vulnerable to this buildup of damaged
molecules. Also, the cellular ma-
chinery involved in breakdown and
recycling processes degrades with age,
reducing the efficiency of the “waste
removal” systems.
Finally, remember that changes
in the aging brain occur within the
context of other changes throughout
the body. Researchers speculate that
worsening cardiovascular health, for
example, could contribute to, or even
drive, many changes seen in the
aging brain.
HEALTHY AGING
We have learned how
the brain changes with
age and why these changes can occur.
Now let’s turn our attention to a
growing field in neuroscience that
explores ways to slow these changes
and preserve healthy brain function.
Diet and Exercise
Strong evidence now suggests
that habits and choices that keep your
body healthy also benefit your mind.
Poor cardiovascular health puts a
person at increased risk of age-related
cognitive impairment. Diets rich in
vegetables, fruits, and whole grains,
and low in meat and dairy products,
can reduce cardiovascular risk factors
linked to cognitive impairment, such
as high blood pressure and high levels
of LDL cholesterol. Indeed, observa-
tional studies have found that people
who follow plant-rich diets such as
the Mediterranean diet or Dietary
Approaches to Stop Hypertension
(DASH) are less likely to develop
cognitive decline and dementia.
Specific nutrients have been linked
to improved cognitive performance
and lower rates of dementia. Anti-
oxidants, such as vitamins C and E,
flavonoids, and omega-3 fatty acids
have received considerable attention,
with observational studies showing
that high dietary intake of these
compounds is beneficial. However,
the results of lifestyle intervention
studies using supplements have been
more mixed. Finally, caloric restriction
— substantially reducing the number
of calories eaten without leading to
malnutrition — has been linked to
Many different theories have been
advanced to explain why neurons,
and cells in general, age. Synapses begin to weaken as a person ages, which can contribute to normal
cognitive decline.
Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
Adult & Aging Brain85958
improved cognitive health as well as a
longer lifespan.
Growing evidence shows that
aerobic exercise can improve cognitive
function and offset some of the de-
clines seen in aging. Numerous studies
have found that people who engage
in regular physical activity show
improved learning, improved mem-
ory, and a reduced risk of developing
dementia. Physical activity might even
slow the progression of Alzheimer’s
disease and dementia, and higher levels
of physical activity have been linked
to improvements in some markers of
structural brain health, such as reduced
cortical thinning and less shrinkage in
the hippocampus.
Exercise exerts its neuroprotec-
tive effects in the brain by improving
neuroplasticity — the brain’s ability to
form and reorganize connections be-
tween neurons in response to changes
in behavior and environment. Scien-
tists also believe that exercise increases
neurogenesis (the formation of new
nerve cells) which, in turn, enhances
neuroplasticity. Evidence from rodent
studies confirms that exercise increases
neurogenesis: Older mice allowed to
run on a wheel have higher rates of
neurogenesis in the hippocampus than
sedentary mice, and they perform bet-
ter on learning and memory tests. Ex-
ercise can also improve blood flow and
increase production of neurotrophic
factors that support new neurons and
synapses. For humans, starting exercise
later in life can be beneficial, but the
studies suggest that adopting an exer-
cise program earlier in life could yield
even more neuroprotective benefits.
Mental Stimulation
and Social Networks
Mental stimulation and large so-
cial networks can also improve cogni-
tive function in aging. In lab studies,
mice housed in cognitively stimulat-
ing environments with many oppor-
tunities for social interaction perform
better on learning and memory tests
as they age compared to mice housed
in standard cages. Much like physical
exercise, cognitive stimulation appears
to enhance neuroplasticity by increas-
ing neurogenesis and boosting levels
of important neurotrophic factors.
People who perform cognitive-
ly-demanding work or engage in
stimulating activities such as reading,
solving puzzles, or playing a musical
instrument have lower rates of cog-
nitive decline with aging. An active
social life has also been shown to be
beneficial for cognition as we age.
Neuroscientists have learned a
lot about the aging brain — how it
changes, why it changes, and how
to maintain healthy cognitive func-
tioning as we age. Even so, many
questions remain. Answers to those
questions could identify new strate-
gies for protecting the brain, not only
in our later years, but throughout
our lives.
Exercise has been shown to increase neurogenesis in the adult brain, and can slow the
cognitive decline associated with aging.
iStock.com/artyme83.
Have you ever considered the
ups and downs that occur
during your day? Speaking
literally, you are up and awake during
the day and lying down sleeping at
night. Speaking figuratively, ups and
downs could mean that you experi-
ence periods of elevated alertness and
arousal compared with your mood when
you are tired or relaxed. Asleep, awake,
aroused, and relaxed are different brain
states, meaning that the brain’s activity
is different during each of these peri-
ods. Scientists have looked deep inside
the brain to understand what sleep is
and how rest differs from being alert.
This research is especially important
for people like doctors, pilots, and shift
workers who sometimes must focus and
make important decisions with very little
sleep. Research on brain states can also
help people who have disorders of sleep,
attention, and learning.
SLEEP
How many hours of sleep do you
get every night? Most people spend
one-third of their lives asleep. While
that might appear to be a lot of time
spent doing nothing, our brains are
active while we rest each night. The
activity in our brains during sleep is
important for brain health and for
solidifying memories.
Most people feel tired and un-
able to focus if they don’t get enough
sleep. In some cases, too little sleep
can impair a person’s driving as much
as drinking alcohol. The long-term ef-
fects of lacking sleep also involve many
health risks. Several studies in humans
have revealed that sleep-deprived
people are at increased risk for a wide
range of health issues including diabe-
tes, stress, obesity, high blood pres-
sure, anxiety, cognitive impairment,
and depression.
CHAPTER
Brain States
9
Brain Facts
6160Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
Brain States 9Brain States9
Brain Activity During Sleep
Scientists can measure the brain’s
electrical activity using electroenceph-
alography (EEG). Electrodes attached
to the scalp detect and record the net
electrical activity of hundreds of thou-
sands of cortical nerve cells. When a
neuron is active, ions move in and out
of the cell, altering the electrical charge
across the cell membrane. An EEG de-
tects the net electrical charge produced
when neurons increase and decrease
their activity as a group, in synchrony.
The results are “brain waves” — the
cyclic rising and falling of brain activ-
ity that can be important indicators of
brain function. In sleep studies, scien-
tists now recognize two main states:
slow wave sleep (SWS) and rapid eye
movement sleep (REM).
SWS gets its name from the
high amplitude, low frequency,
brain waves in EEG recordings.
The high amplitude of slow waves
indicates that many cortical neu-
rons are switching their activity in a
synchronized way from a depolarized
(more excitable) state to a hyperpo-
larized (less excitable) state and back
again. These slow waves appear to
be important to sleep function —
the longer a person stays awake, the
more slow waves they will experience
during the SWS state. Slow waves
become less frequent the longer the
person is asleep. If awakened during
SWS, most people recall only frag-
mented thoughts, not active dreams.
Have you ever seen a cat dream-
ing — twitching its whiskers or paws
while it sleeps? Dreaming happens
mainly during REM sleep, which takes
its name from the periodic rapid eye
movements people make in this state.
Brain activity recorded during REM
looks very similar to EEGs recorded
while awake. EEG waves during REM
sleep have much lower amplitudes
than the SWS slow waves, because
neuron activity is less synchronized
— some nerve cells depolarize while
others hyperpolarize, and the “sum” of
their electrical states is less positive (or
negative) than if they acted in synchro-
ny. Paradoxically, the fast, waking-like
EEG activity during REM sleep is ac-
companied by atonia, a loss of muscle
tone causing the body to become tem-
porarily paralyzed. The only muscles
remaining active are those that enable
breathing and control eye movements.
Oddly enough, the neurons of our
motor cortex fire as rapidly during
REM sleep as they do during waking
movement — a fact that explains why
movements like a kitten’s twitching
paws can coincide with dreams.
During the night, periods of
SWS and REM sleep alternate in
90-minute cycles with 75–80 minutes
of SWS followed by 10–15 minutes
of REM sleep. This cycle repeats,
typically with deeper and longer peri-
ods of REM sleep towards morning.
To study sleep disorders, researchers
often use mice that have sleep struc-
tures qualitatively very similar to hu-
mans; however, rodents have shorter
This chart shows the brain waves of an individual being recorded by an EEG machine during a night’s sleep. As the person falls asleep,
the brain waves slow down and become larger. Throughout the night, the individual cycles though sleep stages, including REM sleep,
where brain activity is similar to wakefulness.
and more frequent sleep episodes
lasting 3–30 minutes (sometimes lon-
ger). Rodents also sleep more during
the day and are more active at night.
Compare that to human adults, who
are typically more active during the
day and have one sleep episode at
night lasting about 8 hours.
Sleep Regulation
How does the brain keep us
awake? Wakefulness is main-
tained by the brain’s arousal systems,
each regulating different aspects of the
awake state. Many arousal systems are
in the upper brainstem, where neurons
connecting with the forebrain use the
neurotransmitters acetylcholine,
norepinephrine, serotonin, and
glutamate to keep us awake. Orexin-
producing neurons, located in the
hypothalamus, send projections to the
brainstem and spinal cord, the thala-
mus and basal ganglia, as well as to the
forebrain, the amygdala, and dopa-
mine-producing neurons. In studies of
rats and monkeys, orexin appears to
exert excitatory effects on other arousal
systems. Orexins (there are two types,
both small neuropeptides) increase
metabolic rate, and their production
can be activated by insulin-induced
low blood sugar. Thus, they are
involved in energy metabolism. Given
these functions, it comes as no surprise
that orexin-producing neurons are
important for preventing a sudden
transition to sleep; their loss causes
narcolepsy, as described below. Orexin
neurons also connect to hypothalamic
neurons containing the neurotransmit-
ter histamine, which plays a role in
staying awake.
The balance of neurotransmitters
in the brain is critically important for
maintaining certain brain states. For
example, the balance of acetylcholine
and norepinephrine can affect wheth-
er we are awake (high acetylcholine
and norepinephrine) or in SWS (low
acetylcholine and norepinephrine).
During REM, norepinephrine re-
mains low while acetylcholine is high,
activating the thalamus and neocortex
enough for dreaming to occur; in
this brain state, forebrain excitation
without external sensory stimuli pro-
duces dreams. The forebrain becomes
excited by signals from the REM
sleep generator (special brainstem
neurons), leading to rapid eye move-
ments and suppression of muscle
tone — hallmark signs of REM.
During SWS, the brain systems
that keep us awake are actively sup-
pressed. This active suppression of
arousal systems is caused by the ven-
trolateral preoptic (VLPO) nucleus, a
group of nerve cells in the hypothala-
mus. Cells in the VLPO release the in-
hibitory neurotransmitters galanin and
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA),
which can suppress the arousal sys-
tems. Damage to the VLPO nucleus
causes irreversible insomnia.
Sleep-Wake Cycle
Two main factors drive your body
to crave sleep: the time of day or night
(circadian system) and how long you
have been awake (homeostatic system).
The homeostatic and circadian systems
are separate and act independently.
The circadian timing system is
regulated by the suprachiasmatic
nucleus, a small group of nerve cells
in the hypothalamus that functions
as a master clock. These cells express
“clock proteins,” which go through a
biochemical cycle of about 24 hours,
setting the pace for daily cycles of
activity, sleep, hormone release, and
other bodily functions. The master
clock neurons also receive input
directly from the retina of the eye.
Thus, light can reset the master clock,
adjusting it to the outside world’s
day/night cycle — this explains how
your sleep cycles can shift when you
change time zones during travel. In
addition, the suprachiasmatic nucleus
sends signals through different brain
regions, eventually contacting the
VLPO and the orexin neurons in the
lateral hypothalamus, which directly
regulate arousal.
What happens in the brain when
we don’t get enough sleep? The second
system that regulates sleepiness is the
The balance of neurotransmitters
in the brain is critically important for
maintaining certain brain states.
6362Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
Brain States 9Brain States9
homeostatic system, which makes you
feel sleepy if you stay awake longer
than usual. One important sleep
factor is a chemical in the brain called
adenosine. When you stay awake for
a long time, adenosine levels in the
brain increase. The increased ade-
nosine binds to specific receptors on
nerve cells in arousal centers to slow
cellular activity and reduce arousal.
Adenosine can increase the number of
slow waves during SWS. As you get
more sleep, adenosine levels fall and
slow waves decrease in number. Caf-
feine acts as a stimulant by binding to
adenosine receptors throughout the
brain and preventing their interaction
with adenosine. As a result, in the
presence of caffeine, fewer receptors
are available for the slowing influence
of adenosine.
People often say they need to
“catch up on sleep.” But can you really
make up for lost sleep? Normally, the
homeostatic and circadian systems
act in a complementary fashion to
produce a normal 24-hour cycle of
sleep and wakefulness. Nonetheless,
activating the brain’s arousal system
can keep us awake even after a long pe-
riod of wakefulness — for example, a
late-night study session to prepare for
an important exam. In normal circum-
stances, the homeostatic system will
respond to the loss of sleep by increas-
ing the duration of ensuing sleep and
increasing the number of slow waves
during the SWS episodes. As noted
above, this rebound slow wave activity
correlates with the previous time spent
awake and is mediated by adenosine.
Sleep Disorders
The most common sleep disorder,
and the one most people are familiar
with, is insomnia. Some people with
insomnia have difficulty falling asleep
initially; others fall asleep, then awak-
en part way through the night and
can’t fall back asleep. Several common
disorders, listed below, disrupt sleep
and prevent people from getting an
adequate amount of sleep.
Daytime sleepiness (not narcolep-
sy), characterized by excessive feelings
of tiredness during the day, has many
causes including sleep apnea (see be-
low). Increased daytime sleepiness can
increase the risk of daytime accidents,
especially car accidents.
Sleep apnea occurs when the air-
way muscles of the throat relax during
sleep, to the point of collapse, closing
the airway. People with sleep apnea
have difficulty breathing and wake up
without entering the deeper stages of
SWS. This condition can cause high
blood pressure and may increase the
risk of heart attack. Treatments for
sleep apnea focus on reducing airway
collapse during sleep; simple changes
that may help include losing weight,
avoiding alcohol or sedating drugs
prior to sleep, and avoiding sleeping
on one’s back. However, most people
with sleep apnea require breathing
machines to keep their airway open.
One such device, called a continuous
positive airway pressure or “CPAP”
machine, uses a small mask that fits
over the nose to provide an airstream
under pressure during sleep. In some
cases, people need surgery to correct
their airway anatomy.
REM sleep behavior disorder
occurs when nerve pathways in the
brain that prevent muscle movement
during REM sleep do not work.
Remember that dreaming happens
during REM sleep, so imagine people
literally acting out their dreams by
getting up and moving around. This
can be very disruptive to a normal
night’s sleep. The cause of REM be-
havior disorder is unknown, but it is
more common in people with degen-
erative neural disease such as Parkin-
son’s, stroke, and types of dementia.
The disorder can be treated with
drugs for Parkinson’s or with a ben-
zodiazepine drug, clonazepam, which
enhances the effects of the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA.
FPO
Electroencephalography measures brain activity through sensors placed on the head. It can
record how the brain reacts to all kinds of stimuli and activities, including sleep.
Simon Fraser University.
Narcolepsy: An Example
of Sleep Disorder Research
Narcolepsy is a relatively
uncommon sleep disorder —
only 1 case per 2,000 people in the
United States — in which the brain
lacks the special neurons that help
control the transition into sleep, so
that the regular cycling is disrupted.
People with narcolepsy have sleep
attacks during the day, causing them
to suddenly fall asleep, which is
especially dangerous if they are
driving. The problem is caused by the
loss of orexin neurons in the lateral
hypothalamus. People with narcolep-
sy tend to enter REM sleep very
quickly and may even enter a dream-
ing state while still partially awake, a
condition known as hypnagogic
hallucination. Some people with
narcolepsy also have attacks in which
they lose muscle tone — similar to
what happens in REM sleep, but
while they’re awake. These attacks of
paralysis, known as cataplexy, can be
triggered by emotional experiences
and even by hearing a funny joke.
Recent research into the mech-
anisms of narcolepsy has provided
important insights into the processes
that control the mysterious transitions
between waking, slow wave sleep,
and REM sleep states. Orexin (in the
lateral hypothalamus) is critical for
preventing abnormal transitions into
REM sleep during the day. In one
study, scientists inactivated the gene
for orexin in mice and measured their
sleep patterns. They found that mice
lacking the orexin gene showed symp-
toms of narcolepsy. Similarly, humans
with narcolepsy have abnormally low
levels of orexin levels in their brain
and spinal fluid.
Because orexin levels are disrupt-
ed in narcolepsy, scientists also began
studying neurons that were neighbors
to orexin neurons to see what hap-
pened if the neighboring neurons were
activated in narcoleptic mice. Those
neurons contained melanin-concen-
trating hormone, and stimulating
them (using a technique called opto-
genetics) induced sleep — opposite to
the effect of stimulating orexin neu-
rons. A balance between the activation
of orexin neurons and their neighbor-
ing neurons could control the tran-
sition between waking and sleeping.
These findings will be important in
developing treatments for narcolepsy.
AROUSAL
Think about what happens in
your body and mind when you speak
in front of a crowd — your brain
state is very different from when
you are asleep. Perhaps you notice
changes in your breathing, heart rate,
or stomach. Maybe your thoughts are
racing or panicked. Or maybe you
are energized and excited to perform
for your audience. These are exam-
ples of the complex brain state
called arousal.
Rather than merely being awake,
arousal involves changes in the body
and brain that provide motivations
to do an action — teaching a class,
speaking in public, or focusing your
attention. People experience arousal
daily when searching for food while
hungry, or when talking with other
people (social interaction). Arousal is
also important for reproduction and
for avoiding danger.
The level of arousal varies across
a spectrum from low to high. When
arousal falls below a certain threshold
we can transition from wake to sleep,
for example. But under heightened
arousal, like intense anxiety, we cannot
reach this threshold and we stay awake.
Neurotransmitters
During arousal, the brain must de-
vote resources to specific brain regions,
much as an emergency call center
redirects resources like ambulances
and fire trucks during a fire. Specific
types of neurons in the brain regions
involved in arousal release multiple
neurotransmitters, telling the rest of
the brain and the body to be on alert.
These neurotransmitters are dopamine
(for movement), norepinephrine (for
alertness), serotonin (for emotion),
and acetylcholine and histamine,
which help the brain communicate
with the body to increase arousal.
Sensory Input
While neurotransmitters provide
the internal signals for arousal, external
signals from the outside world — like
the bright lights (visual input) and
cheering crowds (auditory input) at a
stage performance — can also stimu-
late arousal. Sensory input gets sorted
in the brain region called the thala-
mus. Often called a “sensory clearing
house,” the thalamus regulates arous-
al, receiving and processing sensory
inputs from brain regions important
in senses like vision and hearing and
relaying these inputs to the cortex.
Autonomic Nervous System
Once the brain is aroused, what
does the body do? The reticular
activating system, in the brainstem, co-
ordinates signals coming from sensory
inputs and neurotransmitters to make
sense of events in the brain and pass
that information to the rest of the
body. The reticular activating system
specifically controls the autonomic
nervous system, which affects heart
rate, blood flow, and breathing. By
controlling these automatic body pro-
cesses, the reticular activating system
6564Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
Brain States 9Brain States9
sets up the physical state of arousal,
bringing important resources like oxy-
gen and nutrients to parts of the body
where they are needed.
Together, the changes that happen
in the brain and body during arous-
al enable us to be alert and focused,
which helps us process information
quickly. Using this information, we
can choose the appropriate emotional
response or physical action for a
given situation.
Sexual Arousal
Several complex brain systems and
endocrine (hormone) systems contrib-
ute to sexual arousal and behaviors, but
the brain regions, neurotransmitters,
and body systems are similar to those
involved in general arousal. The dis-
tinguishing factor is that sexual arousal
also involves hormones such as estrogen
and testosterone, which then activate
neurons that release the same neu-
rotransmitters that are released during
general arousal. Many human and ani-
mal studies report interactions between
sex hormones and neurotransmitters
dopamine, serotonin, GABA, and
glutamate. Researchers have also found
that brain regions such as the hypo-
thalamus, amygdala, and hippocampus
contain many estrogen and progester-
one receptors, and brain regions that
mediate feelings of reward (nucleus
accumbens) and emotions like pleasure
(amygdala) motivate sexual behaviors.
Overall, the primary involvement of sex
hormones is a key in defining the brain
state of sexual arousal.
ATTENTION
If you are paying
attention right now,
there should be detectable changes in
your heart rate, breathing, and blood
flow. If that sounds familiar, it’s
because those same physiological
changes occur during arousal, which
is necessary for being alert and paying
attention. As mentioned previously,
the state of arousal calls for reactions
to the environment. To make deci-
sions about what to do, you need to
focus on what’s happening in the
environment, especially involving
anything relevant to your goals. For
example, if your goal is to run away
from an angry bear, you need to be
alert and pay attention to where
you’re running so you don’t trip and
fall. Scientists have theorized that the
state of arousal speeds processing and
improves comprehension of environ-
mental details. Otherwise, your brain
would need an infinite amount of
time and energy to process all of its
sensory inputs (sounds, sights, smells,
and other feelings), because the
environment is always changing.
Focus
Even with multitasking, it is
impossible for the brain to process
all its sensory inputs. Instead, people
focus their attention on one thing at
a time. Attention is a fascinating abil-
ity, because it enables you to have so
much control and the ability to fine-
tune your focus to different locations,
times, and topics. Consider the page
you are reading right now. Although
you can see the whole page, you focus
on only one line at a time. Alterna-
tively, you can turn your attention
to the past — just minutes ago when
you were reading about arousal. Or
you can ignore the sentences alto-
gether and focus on the number of
times the word “you” occurs on this
page. Scientists recognize two types
of attention, which involve different
brain processes: voluntary (endog-
enous) attention and involuntary
(exogenous) attention.
Voluntary attention happens
when you choose what to focus on —
like finding a loved one in a crowd.
The frontal and parietal cortices of
the brain are active when you control
your attention or direct it towards a
specific object or location. Involun-
tary attention occurs when something
in the environment (like a sudden
noise or movement) grabs your atten-
tion. Involuntary attention is a dis-
traction from your chosen goals and,
in fact, researchers often use distrac-
tor objects in attention experiments.
Distractors can be emotional, like
pictures of family, or non-emotional
images that stand out from other
stimuli, like a red circle surrounded
by gray squares. Brain regions in the
right hemisphere, collectively known
as the ventral frontoparietal network,
form a system that processes new and
interesting stimuli that distract you
from the task at hand. Research on at-
tention can help us understand visual
tasks, learning, child development,
and disorders of attention.
Disorders of Attention
Paying attention for long
periods of time, such as a
3-hour lecture, can be difficult for
many people. For some people, even
focusing for a short time can be hard.
Several disorders that affect the ability
to pay attention are attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
schizophrenia, prosopagnosia, and
hemineglect syndrome. It may seem
strange to regard schizophrenia as an
attention disturbance, but some
psychiatric studies suggest that it
involves a failure of selective attention.
Prosopagnosia, or face blindness, is a
cognitive disorder in which a person is
unable to recognize faces — even their
own family members. The severity of
this condition varies, and genetic
factors might be involved. Attention
disorders have various causes, but we
will focus on hemineglect syndrome,
caused by damage to the right parietal
cortex, a brain region important in
involuntary attention.
Between 50–82 percent of pa-
tients who suffer stroke in the right
hemisphere experience hemineglect
syndrome, also known as spatial ne-
glect and unilateral neglect. In these
cases, patients with neglect ignore the
left side of their visual field. Some-
times they ignore the left side of the
body and the left side of individual
objects, as well. Diagnosis of hemine-
glect syndrome can be done with a
pen and paper. For example, patients
can be instructed to draw a copy of
a picture like a butterfly or a castle,
and those patients with hemineglect
usually draw only the right half of
the picture or leave out details of the
left side. Research on patients with
hemineglect syndrome contributes to
our understanding of rehabilitation
after stroke, as well as the role of the
right parietal cortex in attention
and perception.
REST: DEFAULT MODE
NETWORK
What is the difference
between being alert
and resting while awake? During times
of rest and relaxation, you’re usually
avoiding heavy thinking or complicat-
ed tasks, and parts of the brain called
the default mode network are more
active. You may think of the default
mode network as a personal lullaby or
a playlist that turns on when you are
ready to relax. Activity of the default
mode network decreases (the lullaby
gets quieter) when you start doing or
thinking about a demanding task.
Human studies using imaging tech-
niques such as functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) and
positron emission tomography (PET)
have identified which brain regions
belong to the default mode network.
These brain areas, which are involved
in emotion, personality, introspection,
and memory, include frontal brain
regions (ventromedial prefrontal
cortex, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex,
and anterior cingulate cortex), as well
as the posterior cingulate cortex, lateral
parietal cortex, and precuneus.
Although the exact role of the
default mode network is unclear,
the functions of its “participating”
brain regions provide hints about its
purpose. Studies on emotion have
revealed that activity in the ventro-
medial PFC is directly related to
how anxious a subject feels while
performing a task — suggesting that
the default mode network may play a
role in regulating emotion and mood.
Activity in the dorsomedial PFC (a
region involved in self-referential
or introspective thoughts) increases
when a person is at rest and day-
dreaming. The dorsomedial PFC is
also involved in stream-of-conscious-
ness thoughts and thoughts about
oneself in the past, present, or future
(autobiographical self ). The roles of
these regions suggest that the default
mode network may also function
in self-reflection and our sense of
self in time.
The posterior brain regions of the
default mode network (posterior cin-
gulate cortex, lateral parietal cortex,
and precuneus) become more active
when remembering concrete mem-
ories from past experiences. These
brain regions are connected with the
hippocampus, which is important for
learning and forming memories. Both
the hippocampus and the default
mode network are more active when
a person is at rest in the evening and
less active when waking up early in
the day. These patterns indicate that
the default mode network helps to
process and remember the events
of the day.
Future studies using electrical re-
cordings from inside the human brain
can be paired with fMRI to tell us
more about the brain activity patterns
of the default mode network and how
brain regions coordinate their activity
during tasks that utilize the functions
of this network.
Scientists recognize two types of
attention, which involve different brain
processes: voluntary attention and
involuntary attention.
67Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |
The Body in Balance 10
The cells of your body are
immersed in a constantly
changing environment. The
nutrients that sustain them rise and fall
with each meal. Gases, ions, and other
solutes flow back and forth between
your cells and blood. Chemicals bind
to cells and trigger the building and re-
lease of proteins. Your cells digest food,
get rid of wastes, build new tissues,
and destroy old cells. Environmental
changes, both internal and external,
ripple through your body’s physio-
logical systems. One of your brain’s
less-visible jobs is to cope with all these
changes, keep them within a normal
range, and maintain the healthy func-
tions of your body.
The tendency of your body’s tissues
and organ systems to maintain a condi-
tion of balance or equilibrium is called
homeostasis. Homeostasis depends
on active regulation, with dynamic
adjustments that keep the environ-
ment of your cells and tissues relatively
constant. The brain is part of many
homeostatic systems, providing signals
that coordinate your body’s internal
clocks and regulating hormone secre-
tion by the endocrine system. These
functions often involve a region of the
forebrain called the hypothalamus.
CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS
Almost every cell in your body
has an internal clock that tells
it when to become active, when to rest,
and when to divide. These clocks
broker changes in many of the body’s
physiological systems over a 24-hour,
or circadian, period. For example, the
clocks cause faster pulses of peristaltic
waves in your gut during the day and
make your blood pressure dip at night.
But because these clocks are deep
inside your body and cannot detect
daylight, none of them can tell time
CHAPTER
The Body
in Balance
10
on its own. Instead, daily rhythms are
coordinated by the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN), a tiny group of
neurons in the hypothalamus.
Neurons in the SCN act like a met-
ronome for the rest of the body, emit-
ting a steady stream of action potentials
during the day and becoming quiet
at night. The shift between active and
silent states is controlled by cyclic in-
teractions between two sets of proteins
encoded by your body’s “clock” genes.
Researchers first identified clock genes
in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
and studied how they keep time; since
then, a nearly identical set of genes has
been found in mammals. The SCN also
tracks what time it is based on signals
it receives from photoreceptors in the
retina, which keeps its activity in sync
with the Earth’s actual day/night cycle.
That little nudge is very important be-
cause, on their own, clock proteins take
slightly more than 24 hours to complete
a full cycle. Studies of animals deprived
of light have discovered that they go to
sleep and wake up a bit later each day.
An autonomic neural pathway
ties the daily rhythmic activity of the
SCN directly to other clocks in the
body. Neurons in the SCN stimulate an
adjacent region of the brain called the
paraventricular nucleus (PVN), which
in turn sends signals down a chain of
neurons through the spinal cord to the
peripheral organs of the body. You’ve al-
ready learned how signals in part of this
neural pathway stimulate orexin neu-
rons to regulate the body’s sleep/wake
cycle. Related pathways also govern the
secretion of melatonin, a hormone that
influences sleep behaviors. Specifically,
electrical activity originating in the SCN
enters the PVN’s neural network and
sends signals up to the pineal gland, a
small pinecone-shaped gland embedded
between the cerebral hemispheres. The
pineal gland secretes melatonin into the
bloodstream at night. Melatonin binds
to cells in many tissues, and although
it has no direct effect on clock gene
expression in the SCN, its systemic
effects seem to reduce alertness and
increase sleepiness. Light exposure trig-
gers signals that stop melatonin secre-
tion, promoting wakeful behaviors.
Together, these signals keep all the
body’s clocks synchronized to the same
24-hour cycle. Coordinated body clocks
enable your body’s physiological systems
to work together at the right times.
When your body prepares to wake from
sleep, 1) levels of the stress hormone
cortisol peak in the blood, releasing
sugars from storage and increasing
appetite, and 2) core body temperature
begins to drift upwards, raising your
body’s metabolic rate. These events,
synchronized with others, prepare your
body for a new day’s activity.
Desynchronizing the body’s phys-
iological clocks can cause noticeable
and sometimes serious health effects.
You might have experienced a familiar
example of circadian rhythm distur-
bance: jet lag. After crossing many time
zones in a short time period, a person’s
patterns of wakefulness and hunger
are out of sync with day and night.
Exposure to the local day/night cycle
resets the brain and body, but it can
take several days to get fully resynchro-
nized. Circadian rhythms can also be
disturbed by situations like late-shift
jobs or blindness, which decouple nor-
mal daylight signals from wake/sleep
cycles. Long-term circadian disruptions
are associated with health problems
including weight gain, increased rates
of insomnia, depression, and cancers.
HORMONES,
HOMEOSTASIS,
AND BEHAVIOR
Neurons can quickly
deliver the brain’s
messages to precise targets in the body.
Hormones, on the other hand, deliver
messages more slowly but can affect a
larger set of tissues, producing large-
scale changes in metabolism, growth,
and behavior. The brain is one of the
tissues that “listens” for hormonal
signals — neurons throughout the
brain are studded with hormone
receptors — and the brain’s responses
play an important part in regulating
hormone secretion and changing
behaviors to keep the body systems in
Coordinated body clocks enable
your body’s physiological systems
to work together at the right times.
Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
The Body in Balance 10The Body in Balance1068
equilibrium. The brain regions
involved in hormone release are called
the neuroendocrine system.
The hypothalamus oversees the
production and release of many hor-
mones through its close ties to the pi-
tuitary gland. The paraventricular and
supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus
send axons into the posterior part of
the pituitary gland; activation of spe-
cific neurons releases either vasopressin
or oxytocin into capillaries within the
pituitary. Both of these molecules act
as neurotransmitters inside the brain,
but they are also hormones that affect
distant tissues of the body. Vasopressin
(also called antidiuretic hormone) in-
creases water retention in the kidneys
and constricts blood vessels (vasocon-
striction). Oxytocin promotes uterine
contractions during labor and milk
release during nursing.
Other hypothalamic regions send
axons to a capillary-rich area above the
pituitary called the median eminence.
When these neurons are activated,
they release their hormones into the
blood. These releasing (and inhibiting)
hormones travel through local blood
vessels to the anterior pituitary, where
they trigger (or inhibit) secretion of
a second specific hormone. Of the
seven anterior pituitary hormones,
five are trophic hormones — these
travel in the bloodstream to stimulate
activity in specific endocrine glands
(thyroid, adrenal cortex, ovaries, etc.)
throughout the body. The remaining
two hormones act on non-endocrine
tissues. Growth hormone stimulates
the growth of bone and soft tissues,
and prolactin stimulates milk produc-
tion by the breasts. Hormones released
from the anterior pituitary influence
growth, cellular metabolism, emotion,
and the physiology of reproduction,
hunger, thirst, and stress.
Many hormones produced by
the pituitary and its target endocrine
glands affect receptors inside the brain
— thus, these hormones can alter
neuronal function and gene transcrip-
tion in the hypothalamus. The effect
is to reduce the amount of hormone
released by the hypothalamus when
those circuits become active. These
negative feedback loops enable precise
doses of hormones to be delivered to
body tissues, and ensure that the hor-
mone levels are narrowly regulated.
One of these three-hormone
cascades regulates reproduction in
mammals. Its underlying pattern is the
same in both sexes: 1) gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) from the
hypothalamus makes the anterior pi-
tuitary release 2) luteinizing hormone
(LH) and follicle stimulating hormone
(FSH), which in turn make the gonads
secrete 3) sex hormones and start the
development of mature eggs or sperm.
The neuroendocrine system maintains homeostasis, the body’s normal equilibrium, and
controls the response to stress. The adrenal gland releases the stress hormones norepineph-
rine, epinephrine, and cortisol, which quicken heart rate and prepare muscles for action.
Corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH) is released from the hypothalamus and travels to the
pituitary gland, where it triggers the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH
travels in the blood to the adrenal glands, where it stimulates the release of cortisol.
69
Sex hormones, in turn, attach to
receptors in the hypothalamus and an-
terior pituitary and modify the release
of the hypothalamic and pituitary
hormones. However, sex hormones
regulate these feedback loops differ-
ently in males and females.
Male sex hormones induce simple
negative feedback loops that reduce
the secretion of gonadotropin-releas-
ing hormone, luteinizing hormone,
and follicle stimulating hormone. The
interplay among these hormones creates
a repetitive pulse of GnRH that peaks
every 90 minutes. The waxing and wan-
ing of GnRH keeps testosterone levels
relatively steady within body tissues,
maintains male libido, and keeps the
testes producing new sperm each day.
Female feedback patterns are
more complex. Over the course of the
month-long menstrual cycle, female sex
hormones exert both positive and nega-
tive feedback on GnRH, FSH, and LH.
When circulating levels of the
female sex hormones estrogen and
progesterone are low, rising follicle
stimulating hormone levels trigger egg
maturation and estrogen production.
Rising estrogen levels induce luteiniz-
ing hormone levels to rise. As the levels
of female sex hormones rise, they exert
negative feedback on FSH secretion,
limiting the number of eggs that ma-
ture in a month, but positive feedback
on LH, eventually producing the LH
surge that triggers ovulation. After
ovulation, high serum levels of sex hor-
mones again exert negative feedback on
GnRH, FSH, and LH which in turn
reduces ovarian activity. Levels of fe-
male sex hormones therefore decrease,
allowing the cycle to start over again.
Many other hormones are not
regulated by the pituitary gland,
but are released by specific tissues in
response to physiological changes. The
brain contains receptors for many of
these hormones but, unlike pituitary
hormones, it does not directly regulate
their secretion. Instead, when these
hormones bind to receptors on neu-
rons, they modify the output of neural
circuits, producing behavioral changes
that have homeostatic effects. One
example of this is a pair of hormones
called leptin and ghrelin.
Leptin and ghrelin change eating
behavior by regulating food intake
and energy balance. Both hormones
affect hunger, and both are released
in response to changes in an animal’s
internal energy stores. However, they
have different effects on the circuits
they regulate. Ghrelin keeps the
body fed. Released by the wall of the
gastrointestinal tract when the stom-
ach is empty, ghrelin activates hunger
circuits in the hypothalamus that drive
a search for food. Once the stomach is
full, ghrelin production stops, reduc-
ing the desire to eat. In contrast, leptin
helps maintain body weight within a
set range. Leptin is produced by fat
cells and is released when fat stores are
large. When it binds to neurons in the
hypothalamus, leptin suppresses the
activity of hunger circuits and reduces
the desire to eat. As fat stores are used
up, leptin levels decline, driving be-
havior that makes an animal eat more
often and replenish its fat stores.
STRESS
Your body reacts in stereotyped
ways when you feel threatened. You
breathe faster, your heartbeat speeds
up, your muscles tense and prepare
for action. These reactions may have
helped our ancestors run from preda-
tors, but any stressful situation — ar-
guing with your parents, a blind date, a
looming deadline at work, abdominal
cramps, discovering your apartment
was robbed, trying karaoke for the first
time — has the potential to set them
off. Scientists call this reaction the stress
response, and your body turns it on to
some degree in response to any external
or internal threat to homeostasis.
The Stress Response
The stress response weaves togeth-
er three of the brain’s parallel com-
munication systems, coordinating the
activity of voluntary and involuntary
nervous systems, muscles, and metabo-
lism to achieve one defensive goal.
Messages sent to muscles through
the somatic (voluntary) nervous system
prime the body to fight or run from
danger (the fight-or-flight response).
Messages sent through the autonomic
(involuntary) nervous system redirect
nutrients and oxygen to those mus-
cles. The sympathetic branch tells the
adrenal medulla to release the hor-
mone epinephrine (also called adren-
aline), which makes the heart pump
faster and relaxes the arterial walls that
supply muscles with blood so they can
respond more quickly. At the same
time, the autonomic system’s parasym-
pathetic branch restricts blood flow
to other organs including the skin,
gonads, digestive tract, and kidneys.
Finally, a cascade of neuroendocrine
hormones originating in the hypothal-
amus and anterior pituitary circulates
in the bloodstream, affecting processes
like metabolic rate and sexual func-
tion, and telling the adrenal cortex to
release glucocorticoid hormones —
like cortisol — into the blood.
Glucocorticoid hormones bind to
many body tissues and produce wide-
spread effects that prepare the body to
respond to potential threat. These hor-
mones stimulate the production and
release of sugar from storage sites such
as the liver, making energy available to
Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
The Body in Balance1070
muscles. They also bind to brain areas
that ramp up attention and learning.
And they help inhibit nonessential
functions like growth and immune
responses until the crisis ends.
It’s easy to imagine how (and why)
these physiological changes make your
body alert and ready for action. But
when it comes to stress, your body can’t
tell the difference between the danger
of facing down a bull elephant and the
frustration of being stuck in traffic.
When stress is chronic, whatever its
cause, your adrenal glands keep pump-
ing out epinephrine and glucocorti-
coids. Many animal and human studies
have shown that long-term exposure to
these hormones can be detrimental.
Chronic Stress
Overexposure to
glucocorticoids can
damage a wide range of physiological
systems. It can cause muscles to
atrophy, push the body to store energy
as fat, and keep blood sugar abnormal-
ly high — all of these can worsen the
symptoms of diabetes. Overexposure
to glucocorticoids also contributes to
the development of hypertension (high
blood pressure) and atherosclerosis
(hardening of the arteries), increasing
the risk of heart attacks. Because the
hormones inhibit immune system
function, they also reduce resistance to
infection and inflammation, some-
times pushing the immune system to
attack the body’s own tissues.
Chronic stress can also have specif-
ic negative effects on brain tissue and
function. Persistently high levels of
glucocorticoids inhibit neuron growth
inside the hippocampus, impairing the
normal processes of memory forma-
tion and recall. Stress hormones can
also suppress neural pathways that are
normally active in decision-making
and cognition, and speed the deteri-
oration in brain function caused by
aging. They may worsen the damage
caused by a stroke. And they can
lead to sleep disorders — cortisol is
also an important wakeful signal in
the brain, so the high cortisol levels
due to chronic stress may delay sleep.
Stress-induced insomnia can then start
a vicious cycle, as the stress of sleep
deprivation leads to the release of even
more glucocorticoids.
The effects of chronic stress may
even extend beyond a single indi-
vidual, because glucocorticoids play
important roles in brain development.
If a pregnant woman suffers from
chronic stress, the elevated stress hor-
mones can cross the placenta and shift
the developmental trajectory of her
fetus. Glucocorticoids are transcription
factors, which can bind to DNA and
modify which genes will be expressed
as proteins. Studies with animal mod-
els have shown that mothers with high
blood levels of glucocorticoids during
pregnancy often have babies with low-
er birth weights, developmental delays,
and more sensitive stress responses
throughout their lives.
Because metabolic stressors such as
starvation induce high glucocorticoid
levels, it’s been suggested that these
hormones might help prepare the fetus
for the environment it will be born
into. Tough, stressful environments
push fetuses to develop stress-sensitive
“thrifty” metabolisms that store fat eas-
ily. Unfortunately, these stress-sensitive
metabolisms increase a person’s risk of
developing chronic metabolic diseases
like obesity or diabetes, especially if they
subsequently grow up in lower-stress
environments with plentiful food.
The effects of stress can even be
passed to subsequent generations by
epigenetic mechanisms. Chronic stress
can change the markers on DNA
molecules that indicate which of the
genes in a cell are expressed and which
are silenced. Some animal studies
indicate that when changes in markers
occur in cells that develop into eggs or
sperm, these changes can be passed on
and expressed in the animal’s offspring.
Further research might reveal wheth-
er chronic stress has similar effects
in humans, and whether inheriting
silenced or activated genes contributes
to family histories of cancer, obesity,
cardiovascular, psychiatric, or neurode-
velopmental disease.
Chronic stress can also have
specific negative effects on brain
tissue and function.
AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDERS
Autism is often considered a
childhood condition, although
many of its symptoms persist lifelong.
Some people with autism also have
mood and anxiety disorders, seizures,
intellectual disability, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
However, more than 40 percent of
people with autism have normal or
above-average intelligence. With
symptoms that range from mildly to
severely disabling, autism is considered
a spectrum. Autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) are diagnosed based on two
main criteria: impaired social commu-
nication and interaction, and repetitive
behaviors or narrow, obsessive inter-
ests. For example, some people on the
autism spectrum are unable to speak,
while others are socially awkward but
highly articulate. Many adults with an
autism diagnosis think of their autism
as a strength — enabling or motivating
them to develop deep expertise in an
area or a different perspective on the
world — rather than a disorder that
needs to be cured.
Currently, 1 of every 68 American
8-year-olds is estimated to meet the
diagnostic criteria for an autism spec-
trum disorder. The prevalence of ASD
has risen dramatically since the 1970s,
but it is unclear whether changes to
diagnostic criteria and wider recogni-
tion of ASD have contributed to the
increase in diagnoses.
Four to five times more boys
than girls are diagnosed with autism,
although it is not clear whether some
of that pattern is because of underdi-
agnosis of girls. Environmental factors
such as parents having children later in
life, fever and infection during preg-
nancy, and premature birth have been
CHAPTER
Childhood
Disorders
11
71Brain Facts
7372Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
Childhood Disorders 11Childhood Disorders11
linked to an increased risk of autism
in children. A huge number of studies
have found no connection between
childhood vaccination and the increase
in autism diagnoses.
Autism is believed to be at least
partially driven by genetics, but how
do scientists know that for sure? One
low-tech approach uses twin studies:
If one of a pair of identical twins
receives an autism diagnosis, the other
twin has greater than a 50 percent
chance of also being diagnosed with
ASD. Children who have an older
sibling on the spectrum also have a
higher likelihood of being diagnosed
with autism — nearly one in five also
receives a diagnosis of ASD.
The genetics of autism is very
complicated in most cases, involving
dozens (or more) of genes, leading
to a unique condition in nearly
every person. Recently, however,
high-throughput genomic analyses
have broadened the pool of potential
genes, revealed their roles in the body,
and suggested possible new therapies.
It appears that many genes, each
with a small effect, contribute to the
inheritance of most ASDs. But such
small effects make these genes hard to
identify in genome-wide association
studies. Scientists are now looking at
the rare variants associated with ASD.
These afflict fewer people with ASD,
but their effects are larger and easier to
detect. Some of these rare mutations
are in single genes whose impairment
is already known to cause intellectu-
al disability and social dysfunction.
These genes include FMR1 (codes for
fragile X mental retardation protein,
but its non-mutant form is needed
for normal cognitive development);
PTEN (codes for a tumor suppressor
enzyme that regulates cell division,
so cells don’t divide or grow too fast);
and TSC1 or TSC2 (tuberous sclerosis
complex 1 and 2), which also code for
proteins that help control cell growth
and size. Between 50 to 60 percent of
people with fragile X syndrome and
approximately 40 percent of people
with tuberous sclerosis complex have
ASD. Children with a variant of the
gene NF-1 develop tumors in child-
hood (neurofibromatosis) and a 2011
study found that nearly 10 percent
met the criteria for autism.
Intriguingly, these ASD-related
genes influence a major signaling
pathway for regulating cell metabo-
lism, growth, and proliferation, the
mTOR pathway. This suggests a very
real potential for treating autism with
drugs that target the mTOR pathway.
For example, mouse models with
mutations in PTEN show traits simi-
lar to humans with these gene vari-
ants: altered sociability, anxiety, and
repetitive behaviors. These behaviors
can be relieved or reversed by drugs
that inhibit the mTOR pathway.
Clinical trials of these drugs (rapamy-
cin and lovastatin) are underway.
Despite this progress, autism
genetics is so complicated that it can’t
be used to diagnose the condition.
And unlike diabetes, kidney disease, or
thyroid disease, there are no biochem-
ical or other biomarkers of autism.
Currently, autism diagnosis is based on
behavioral analysis, but efforts are un-
derway to use more objective criteria
such as tracking eye movements and
functional neuroimaging, which can
even be done in infants.
How early can autism be detect-
ed? Parents often notice develop-
mental issues before their child’s first
birthday, and autism can be reliably
diagnosed based on behavioral
characteristics at age 2. Despite these
possibilities for early detection, most
American children aren’t diagnosed
until they’re about 4½ years old. With
evidence mounting that interventions
are more effective the earlier they be-
gin, researchers are hoping that more
objective measures will enable earlier
diagnoses and interventions.
Although the molecular caus-
es and characteristics of autism are
unclear, it appears that the condition
results from unusual cellular develop-
ment within the cerebral cortex — a
brain region that is crucial to mem-
ory, attention, perception, language,
and other functions. Both white
and gray matter of the brain show
consistent, but subtle, alterations in
people with ASD. Long-term studies
also have found that a minority of
children on the autism spectrum have
abnormally large brain volumes and
faster brain growth. Other toddlers
with autism have shown unusual
development and network inefficien-
cies at the back of the cerebral cortex.
There is evidence that some atypical
activity occurs in the cortex of people
with ASD from older childhood into
adulthood, and information might
not be integrated in the usual way
across distributed brain networks.
At this point, no medications have
been proven to reverse autism. Some
people get symptomatic relief from
drugs designed for other uses, such as
anxiety conditions, and several stud-
ies have reported social benefits from
treatment with oxytocin — a hormone
known to improve social bonding —
but the findings have been mixed. For
this challenging disorder, behavioral
therapies are still the only proven treat-
ments for autism, and early interven-
tions are the most effective.
ATTENTION DEFICIT
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER
Attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) is one of the most
commonly diagnosed childhood
conditions. In 2014, approximately
11 percent of American parents with
a child between the ages of 4 and 17
reported that their son or daughter
had received an ADHD diagnosis. In
at least 30 percent of those diagnosed
with ADHD, the disorder continues
into adulthood.
ADHD is usually characterized by
inattentiveness, as well as hyperactivity
or impulsive behaviors. Although all
young children can be hyperactive,
impulsive, and inattentive from time
to time, these symptoms are more
extreme and last longer in children
with ADHD. They often struggle to
form strong friendships, and their
grades in school can reflect their
behavior instead of their academic
ability. Executive functions, such as
finishing what they start, remembering
to bring homework back to school,
and following multistep directions, can
be especially challenging for those with
ADHD. Young people with ADHD
also have lower rates of high school
graduation and a higher risk of suicide.
No objective diagnostic test exists
for ADHD, so diagnosis requires a
comprehensive evaluation, including
a clinical interview and parent and
teacher ratings. Because problems
with attention and hyperactivity can
be caused by other conditions such as
depression, sleep issues, and learning
disorders, careful evaluation is always
needed to determine whether ADHD
is truly the cause of the symptoms. To
warrant an ADHD diagnosis, atten-
tion and behavioral problems must be
severe enough that they interfere with
normal functioning. In addition, the
behavioral issues must be present in
more than one context — not only at
home or at school, but in both settings.
Although ADHD tends to run in
families, no well-defined set of genes
is known to be responsible for the
condition. Environmental risk factors,
such as extreme early adversity, expo-
sure to lead, and low birthweight, can
also be involved. People with ADHD
do not demonstrate any obvious brain
alterations, but research has found that
people with ADHD might have dif-
ferences in the structure of brain cells
and in the brain’s ability to remodel
itself. Some people with ADHD show
unusual activity in brain cells that re-
lease dopamine, a chemical messenger
involved in rewarding behavior.
ADHD has no cure, but treat-
ments include drugs, behavioral
interventions, or both. Interestingly,
ADHD medications include stimu-
lants such as methylphenidate, as well
as newer, non-stimulant drugs. The
drugs are available in long-acting for-
mulations so children do not have to
interrupt the school day to take their
medication. Determining the right
drug and the right dose might require
a period of experimentation and sup-
port from a specialist, since dosage is
adjusted to how fast a child metaboliz-
es the drug, and to minimize the side
effects. Nevertheless, most children
with ADHD are diagnosed and treated
by their pediatricians. Effective behav-
ioral treatments include organizational
support, exercise, and meditation.
DOWN SYNDROME
Down syndrome is named for the
English physician who first described
it in 1866, but nearly 100 years passed
before scientists determined what
caused the condition: possessing an
extra copy of all or part of the 21st
chromosome. People with this syn-
drome have three copies of this genetic
material, instead of two. In some cases,
the extra copy, or trisomy, does not
occur in every cell, producing what’s
known as mosaicism. Currently, about
250,000 people in the United States
are living with Down syndrome.
There is no clear cause of the
genetic glitch, although maternal age
is a major risk factor for Down syn-
drome. Mothers older than 40 are 8.5
times more likely to have a child with
Down syndrome than mothers aged
20 to 24. Advanced paternal age has
also been linked to higher incidence
of Down syndrome.
The genetics of autism is very
complicated in most cases, involving
dozens of genes, leading to a unique
condition in nearly every person.
7574Brain Factssociety for neuroscience |Brain Facts society for neuroscience|
Childhood Disorders 11Childhood Disorders11
Since late 2011, fetuses can be
screened for Down syndrome using the
mother’s blood. In the past, the risk of
test procedures meant that only older
mothers (whose likelihood of having a
Down syndrome child was known to
be higher) should be screened. Younger
mothers didn’t know until delivery
whether their child would have Down
syndrome. The new blood test, unlike
amniocentesis and chorionic villus
sampling, poses no risk to the baby, so
it can also be used for younger moth-
ers whose chance of having a child
with Down syndrome is quite small.
Children born with Down syn-
drome have distinctive facial features,
including a flattened face and bridge
of the nose, eyes that slant upward,
and small ears. They usually have small
hands and feet, short stature, and poor
muscle tone as well. The intellectual
abilities of people with Down syndrome
are typically low to moderate, although
some graduate from high school and
college, and many successfully hold
jobs. Other symptoms of Down
syndrome can include hearing loss and
heart defects, and virtually everyone
born with Down will develop early-on-
set Alzheimer’s disease, often in their
40s or 50s. Chromosome 21 contains
the gene that encodes amyloid precur-
sor protein (APP), an Alzheimer’s dis-
ease risk factor, and possessing an extra
copy of this gene might cause the early
onset of this fatal disease. Interestingly,
people with mosaic Down syndrome
seem to have milder symptoms and are
more likely to live past 50.
There is no real treatment for
Down syndrome, nor any clear expla-
nation of what occurs in the brain.
Poor connections among nerve cells in
the hippocampus, the part of the brain
involved in memory (and the first brain
area affected by Alzheimer’s disease),
are believed to be a key factor in brain
or intellectual differences in Down syn-
drome. Dysfunction in the mitochon-
dria, the cell’s power plants, might also
play a role in development of related
disorders that involve energy metabo-
lism, such as diabetes and Alzheimer’s.
Scientists have grown stem cells
from fetuses with Down syndrome and
used them to test potential treatments
and confirm which molecular path-
ways are involved in the condition. In
one such laboratory study, researchers
took a gene that normally inactivates
the second X chromosome in female
mammals and spliced it into a stem cell
that had three copies of chromosome
21. In these cells, the inactivation gene
muted the expression of genes on the
extra chromosome 21, believed to con-
tribute to Down syndrome. Although
this is a long way from any clinical ap-
plications, the model is being used to
test the changes and cellular problems
that occur with the tripling of the 21st
chromosome, in hopes of eventually
finding a treatment.
DYSLEXIA
Dyslexia is the most common
and best-studied of the
learning disabilities, affecting as many
as 15 to 20 percent of all Americans.
People with dyslexia have a pro-
nounced difficulty with reading
despite having normal intelligence,
education, and motivation.
Symptoms include trouble with
pronunciation, lack of fluency, diffi-
culty retrieving words, poor spelling,
and hesitancy in speaking. People with
dyslexia might need more time to
respond orally to a question and might
read much more slowly than their peers.
Dyslexia is usually diagnosed in elemen-
tary school, when a child is slow to read
or struggling with reading. Although
reading skills and fluency can improve,
dyslexia persists lifelong.
Deciphering printed letters and
words and recalling their sounds and
meaning involves many areas of the
brain. Brain imaging studies indicate
these areas can be less well connected
in people with dyslexia. One of these
areas is a region on the left side of the
brain called the “word-form area,”
which is involved in the recognition of
printed letters and words. People with
dyslexia also show less brain activity in
the left occipitotemporal cortex, which
is considered essential for skilled read-
ing. Researchers believe that the brain
differences are present before the read-
ing and language difficulties become
apparent — although it is possible
that people with dyslexia read less and,
therefore, their brains develop less in
regions associated with reading. Those
with dyslexia appear to compensate for
reduced activity on the left side of the
brain by relying more heavily on the
right side.
Genetic analyses have revealed a
handful of susceptibility genes, with
animal models suggesting that these
genes affect the migration of brain
cells during development, leading to
differences in brain circuitry. Dyslexia
runs in families, with roughly half of
dyslexics sharing the condition with
a close relative. When one twin is
diagnosed with dyslexia, the second
twin is found to have the condition
55-70 percent of the time. But the
genetics of dyslexia is complex, and
likely involves a wide range of genes
and environmental factors.
Treatment for dyslexia involves
behavioral and educational interven-
tion, especially exercises like breaking
words down into sounds and linking
the sounds to specific letter patterns.
Some researchers use a child’s ability
to rapidly and automatically name
things as an early indicator of dyslexia.
This rapid automatic naming, and the
ability to recognize and work with the
sounds of language, are often impaired
in people with dyslexia. Both skills can
be used in preschoolers and kinder-
gartners to predict their later reading
skills. Research suggests that treat-
ments targeting phonology, as well as
multiple levels of language skills, show
the greatest promise.
EPILEPSY
If someone has two or more
seizures that cannot be explained by a
temporary underlying medical condi-
tion such as a high fever or low blood
sugar, their medical diagnosis will be
“epilepsy” — from the Greek words
meaning to “seize,” “attack,” or “take
hold of.” About 1 percent of Ameri-
can children and 1.8 percent of adults
have been diagnosed with this brain
disorder. Seizures result from irregular
activities in brain cells that can last
five or more minutes at a time. Some
seizures look like staring spells, while
others cause people to collapse, shake,
and become unaware of what is going
on around them. The pattern of symp-
toms and after-seizure brain recordings
using EEGs are used to distinguish
between different types of epilepsy and
determine whether the true cause of
the seizures is epilepsy or a different
medical condition.
Seizures are classified by where
they occur in the brain. General-
ized seizures affect both sides of the
brain. They include absence or petit
mal seizures, which can cause rapid
blinking or a few seconds of staring
into space, and tonic-clonic or grand
mal seizures, which can make some-
one fall, have muscle spasms, cry out,
and/or lose consciousness. Focal or
partial seizures are localized to one
area of the brain. A simple focal sei-
zure can cause twitching or a change
in sensation, triggering strange smells
or tastes. Complex focal seizures can
leave a person confused and unable
to answer questions or follow direc-
tions. A person can also have so-called
secondary generalized seizures, which
begin in one part of the brain but
spread to become generalized seizures.
In some patients with severe epilepsy,
multiple types of seizure can occur at
the same time.
Epilepsy has many possible causes
and thus is considered a spectrum
rather than a single disorder. Causes
include premature birth, brain trauma,
and abnormal development due to
genetic factors. Attributes of epilepsy
patients such as head size, movement
disorders, and family history suggest
that genetics is involved.
Seizures can also accompany or
cause intellectual or psychiatric prob-
lems. For example, some seizures may
suppress the growth of dendrites, leav-
ing the person emotionally unsettled
or less able to learn.
Treatments for epilepsy are direct-
ed toward controlling seizures with
medication or diet. For most patients,
a single medication is enough to
control seizures, although a significant
minority cannot get adequate control
from drugs. About half of epilepsy pa-
tients, particularly those with general-
ized epilepsy, can reduce their seizures
by eating a ketogenic diet, which relies
heavily on high-fat, low-carbohydrate
foods, although it’s unclear why this
diet is effective. For severe cases that
are not relieved by medication, doctors
might recommend surgery to remove
or inactivate the seizure-initiating part
of the brain. In the most severe cases,
if one side of the brain triggers sei-
zures on the other side, surgeons may
perform “split-brain surgery,” cutting
the corpus callosum, a thick band of
white matter that connects the two
sides of the brain. Once their seizures
are controlled, people with epilepsy
can resume their normal lives.
Epilepsy has many possible causes
and thus is considered a spectrum
rather than a single disorder.