**Plant‐Based Diets Are Associated With a Lower Risk of Incident Cardiovascular Disease, Cardiovascular Disease Mortality, and All‐Cause Mortality in a General Population of Middle‐Aged Adults**
Abstract

Background
Previous studies have documented the cardiometabolic health benefits of plant‐based diets; however, these studies were conducted in selected study populations that had narrow generalizability.

Methods and Results
We used data from a community‐based cohort of middle‐aged adults (n=12 168) in the ARIC (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities) study who were followed up from 1987 through 2016. Participants’ diet was classified using 4 diet indexes. In the overall plant‐based diet index and provegetarian diet index, higher intakes of all or selected plant foods received higher scores; in the healthy plant‐based diet index, higher intakes of only the healthy plant foods received higher scores; in the less healthy plant‐based diet index, higher intakes of only the less healthy plant foods received higher scores. In all indexes, higher intakes of animal foods received lower scores. Results from Cox proportional hazards models showed that participants in the highest versus lowest quintile for adherence to overall plant‐based diet index or provegetarian diet had a 16%, 31% to 32%, and 18% to 25% lower risk of cardiovascular disease, cardiovascular disease mortality, and all‐cause mortality, respectively, after adjusting for important confounders (all P<0.05 for trend). Higher adherence to a healthy plant‐based diet index was associated with a 19% and 11% lower risk of cardiovascular disease mortality and all‐cause mortality, respectively, but not incident cardiovascular disease (P<0.05 for trend). No associations were observed between the less healthy plant‐based diet index and the outcomes.

Conclusions
Diets higher in plant foods and lower in animal foods were associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in a general population.


Clinical Perspective

What Is New?
    • Plant‐based diets, diets that emphasize higher intakes of plant foods and lower intakes of animal foods, are associated with a lower risk of incident cardiovascular disease, cardiovascular disease mortality, and all‐cause mortality in a general US adult population.
    • Healthful plant‐based diets, diets higher in nutrient‐dense plant foods and lower in refined carbohydrates and animal foods, are associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease mortality and all‐cause mortality, but not incident cardiovascular disease.

What Are the Clinical Implications?
    • Our results suggest that dietary patterns that are relatively higher in plant foods and relatively lower in animal foods may confer benefits for cardiovascular health.
    • Future research examining whether the quality of plant foods (healthful versus less healthful) within the framework of an overall plant‐based diet is associated with cardiovascular disease and all‐cause mortality is warranted.

Introduction
Plant‐based diets are dietary patterns that emphasize higher intakes of plant foods and are low in animal foods. Vegetarian diets, a type of plant‐based diet, with a focus on restriction of different types of animal foods (meat, poultry, or fish), have been associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular risk factors, such as obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and ischemic heart disease.1, 2, 3 However, prospective cohort studies have shown mixed results on the associations with cardiovascular disease mortality and all‐cause mortality.4, 5, 6 These previous studies were conducted in selected study populations that were mostly composed of Seventh‐Day Adventists, vegetarians, or health‐conscious individuals; thus, they had relatively narrow generalizability.4, 5, 7, 8, 9
Although prior studies have characterized participants’ diets using a relatively simple classification method based on frequency of animal food consumption,4, 5, 6 there have since been more comprehensive attempts to assess an individual's diet using plant‐based diet indexes.10, 11, 12, 13 These indexes give higher scores for higher consumption of plant foods and lower consumption of animal foods, allowing researchers to examine whether the degree of adherence to an overall plant‐based diet is associated with health outcomes. Studies that used such indexes (ie, an overall plant‐based diet index [PDI] or a provegetarian diet index) found that greater adherence to these diets was associated with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, and all‐cause mortality.10, 11, 12 In addition, some plant‐based indexes separately scored healthful (whole grains, vegetables, and plant proteins) and unhealthful (refined carbohydrates and sugar) plant sources of food. Healthful plant‐based diets, which scored higher intakes of only healthful plant foods higher, were more strongly inversely associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus and coronary heart disease than the overall plant‐based diets.11, 12 In contrast, greater adherence to less healthful (unhealthful) plant‐based diets, which scored higher intakes of only less healthful plant foods higher, were associated with a higher risk of these conditions.11, 12
Given the limited evidence on plant‐based diets in the general population and recent developments in plant‐based diet scores, the objectives of the present study were as follows: (1) to evaluate whether overall plant‐based diets are associated with a lower risk of incident cardiovascular disease, cardiovascular disease mortality, and all‐cause mortality in a general US population; and (2) to assess if the association differed by adherence to healthful and less healthful plant‐based diets using 4 a priori defined plant‐based diet scores (overall plant‐based diet, healthy plant‐based diet, less healthy plant‐based diet, and provegetarian diet indexes).

Study Design
We used data from a community‐based cohort of middle‐aged men and women (45–64 years of age at baseline, n=15 792) in the ARIC study. From 1987 to 1989, participants from 4 US communities (Washington County, Maryland; Forsyth County, North Carolina; Minneapolis, MN; and Jackson, MS) were enrolled in the study. Follow‐up visits occurred in 1990 to 1992 (visit 2), 1993 to 1995 (visit 3), 1996 to 1998 (visit 4), 2011 to 2013 (visit 5), and 2016 to 2017 (visit 6).14 The Institutional Review Board at each study site approved the study protocol, and participants provided informed consent.

Dietary Assessment
At baseline and visit 3, participants’ usual intake of foods and beverages was assessed by trained interviewers using a modified version of the 66‐item semiquantitative Willett food frequency questionnaire. Participants indicated the frequency with which they consumed foods and beverages of a defined serving size in the previous year. Visual guides, such as glasses and measuring cups, were provided for participants to estimate portion size. The reliability of the food frequency questionnaire was assessed in a random sample of ARIC study participants (n=419) from all 4 study sites at visit 2.15 Nutrient and total energy intakes were derived through multiplying consumption of food by nutrient content of each item in the food frequency questionnaire.

Plant‐Based Diet Scores
The ARIC study did not assess whether participants were following a plant‐based diet. We used established plant‐based diet scores (PDI, healthy plant‐based diet index [hPDI], less healthy [unhealthy] plant‐based diet index [uPDI], and provegetarian diet index) to assess participants’ degree of adherence to plant‐based diets on the basis of their reported dietary intake on the food frequency questionnaire. We used these 4 plant‐based diet indexes to provide comprehensive and nuanced characterization of dietary intakes because the indexes differed from each other in scoring of food groups within the indexes. For instance, the PDI was more comprehensive than the provegetarian index in that the PDI assessed dietary intakes of plant foods high in refined carbohydrates (fruit juices, sugar‐sweetened beverages, sweets, and desserts). Consistent with some ethically motivated dietary patterns that are focused on the exclusion of animal sources of food and have less of an emphasis on the quality of plant foods, the provegetarian diet index provides a more simplistic score of the diet in that these refined carbohydrate food groups were not assessed. Further details on differences and construction of the scores have been published previously and are available in Data S1.10, 11, 12, 13, 16
The PDI, hPDI, and uPDI had a possible range from 17 to 85, and the provegetarian diet index had a possible range from 11 to 55. All scores were divided into quintiles for analyses.

Outcome Assessment
Incident cardiovascular disease events and deaths (cardiovascular and all cause) were ascertained through annual telephone calls with participants or proxies, active surveillance of local hospital discharge records and state death records, and linkage to the National Death Index from baseline to December 31, 2016. Incident cardiovascular disease was defined as a composite outcome of coronary heart disease, stroke, and heart failure. Incident coronary heart disease was defined as hospitalized myocardial infarction or fatal coronary heart disease.17 Incident stroke was defined as definite or probable stroke, which was adjudicated.18 Incident heart failure was defined as hospitalization or death, with International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD‐9), code 428 or International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD‐10), code I50.19 All‐cause mortality was defined as deaths attributable to any cause, and cardiovascular disease mortality was defined as deaths with ICD‐9 codes 390 to 459 or ICD‐10 codes I00 to I99.

Covariate Assessment
At baseline, participants’ sociodemographic information (age, sex, race/ethnicity, and education), health behaviors (cigarette smoking, frequency and duration of physical activity, alcohol intake, and margarine intake), medication use (lipid‐lowering medication use, antihypertensive medication use, or diabetes mellitus medication use), and health conditions (diagnosis of diseases) were collected by self‐reports.
Trained staff measured participants’ weight and height, which was used to calculate body mass index (BMI; kg/m2). Those whose BMI was ≤25 kg/m2 were classified as normal weight, those whose BMI was from 25 to <30 kg/m2 were classified as overweight, and those whose BMI was ≥30 kg/m2 were classified as obese. An enzymatic method was used to measure total cholesterol concentration.20 A certified technician measured participants’ blood pressure 3 times, and the second and third measurements were averaged. The modified hexokinase/glucose‐6‐phosphate dehydrogenase method was used to measure blood glucose concentrations. Baseline kidney function (estimated glomerular filtration rate) was estimated from serum creatinine measurement using the 2009 Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration equation.21 We defined hypertension as systolic blood pressure of ≥140 mm Hg, diastolic blood pressure of ≥90 mm Hg, or antihypertensive medication use in the past 2 weeks. We defined diabetes mellitus as fasting glucose concentration of ≥126 mg/dL, nonfasting blood glucose concentration of ≥200 mg/dL, self‐reported physician's diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, or diabetes mellitus medication use in the past 2 weeks.