If the lander comes to rest on a rock, the entire lander may be tilted, but further
maneuvering of the petals can be performed during surface operations to lower the overall tilt
of the lander.
Telecommunications during entry should provide significant information about the
behavior of the entry, descent and landing subsystem. Digital data will not be acquired, however, because of the extremely weak signal.
25
The amplitude and frequency of the spacecraft will be observed in real-time during
entry and descent, and may be seen during petal deployment, depending on the lander's orientation once it comes to a stop on the Martian surface. Changes in amplitude are expected at cruise
stage separation, parachute deployment, surface impact and during the airbag retraction and
petal deployment. Changes in frequency reflect changes in the spacecraft's speed and will be
most pronounced during the period of peak deceleration.
The spacecraft also will deliberately change the frequency of the subcarrier to signal
other key events. These include heat shield separation, bridle deployment, crossing the threshold altitude of 600 meters (about 2,000 feet) above the surface, completion of airbag retraction
and completion of the petal deployment sequence. These planned frequency changes -- called
"semaphores" -- are not likely to be detected in real-time, but can be extracted by post-processing the recorded data. In addition, key spacecraft telemetry data will be recorded and played
back after landing.
Other key data to be transmitted to Earth include accelerometer measurements and
selected atmospheric structure instrument measurements. The Deep Space Network's 70-meter
(230-foot) and 34-meter (110-foot) antennas in Madrid, Spain, will be used to support entry
communications.
Prime Mission
Mars Pathfinder's primary mission begins when its lander petals have been fully unfolded and the lander switches to a sequence of computer commands that will control its functions.
The spacecraft lands about 2-1/2 hours before sunrise on Mars and will spend the time in darkness retracting its airbags, standing itself upright and opening the petals so that solar panels can
be powered up after sunrise.
The lander's first task will be to transmit engineering and science data collected during its
descent through the thin atmosphere of Mars. If no errors are detected in these data and the
spacecraft is basically healthy, a real-time command will be sent from Earth instructing the lander to unlock the imager camera head, deploy and point the high-gain antenna. If conditions
are different than expected, which is not unlikely, the opeation team will execute a contingency
plan that has been placed onboard the spacecraft in expectation of such conditions.
In the normal plan, the lander's camera will begin taking images -- including a panoramic view of the Martian landscape -- and will begin transmitting the data directly to Earth at
2,250 bits per second. The first images of the Martian landscape will tell engineers whether the
airbags are fully retracted and whether the rover's exit ramp can be safely and successfully
deployed. Once either or both ramps are deployed, additional images will be acquired to show
the terrain beyond the ramps so that engineers can decide on the safest exit route. If the highgain antenna is not available, data will be sent over the lander’s low-gain antenna at a much
lower rate of 40 bits per second. In this case, only a few, highly compressed images will be
sent.
26
Once a decision on the route has been made, commands will be sent to deploy the rover.
Sojourner will spend about a quarter of an hour exiting its ramp. The rover should be deployed
within the first three days after landing.
Driving off onto the floor of an old outflow channel, Sojourner will explore the surface
at the command of Earth-based operators, who will rely on lander-based images to select a path
and target for the rover. The six-wheeled Sojourner travels at 1 centimeter (0.4 inch) per second, performing mobility tests, imaging its surroundings and deploying an alpha proton x-ray
spectrometer designed to study the elemental composition of rocks. During its prime mission,
the rover will likely range a few tens of meters (yards) from the lander.
Also mounted on the lander are wind sensors, wind socks and high- and low-gain antennas. Instruments will be used to measure the pressure, temperature and density of the Martian
atmosphere. Magnets mounted on the lander will collect magnetic specimens of Martian dust
and soil as small as 100 microns (about 1/250th of an inch).
Extended Missions
The primary mission lasts seven Martian days, or "sols," for the rover, and 30 Martian
days, or "sols," for the lander. The rover could carry out an extended mission beyond that period, depending on how long its power sources and electronics last; engineers expect that the
most probable reason for it to stop functioning is hot-cold cycling of its onboard electronics
between Martian day and night.
Sojourner's extended mission activities would include repeating soil mechanics experiments on various soils; additional spectrometer measurements of both rocks and soil; obtaining
images of selected areas with the rover camera, including close-ups of the lander; obtaining
images of the lander's landing and tumbling path; and traveling longer distances, with the possibility of going over the horizon, up to hundreds of meters (yards).
For the lander, an extended mission lasting up to one year after landing is possible.
Lander activities in the extended mission would include continued use of the lander camera to
obtain images of the terrain and atmosphere, collection of key engineering telemetry and continued collection of meteorology data.
Mission Operations
All operations for Mars Pathfinder will be conducted at JPL, where the operations and
science teams reside. Science data, both raw and processed, will be transferred after a period of
validation to NASA's Planetary Data System archive for access and use by the planetary community at large and the general public. The Planetary Data System home page is at
http://pds.jpl.nasa.gov/pds_home.html . Images from planetary missions are also available
via the web from NASA’s Planetary Photojournal at http://photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov .
27
Spacecraft
At launch the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft weighed about 895 kilograms (1,973 pounds),
including its cruise stage, heat shield and backshell (or aeroshell), solar panels, propulsion
stage, medium- and- high-gain antennas and 94 kilograms (207 pounds) of cruise propellant.
The cruise vehicle measures 2.65 meters (8.5 feet) in diameter and stands 1.5 meters (5 feet)
tall. The lander is a tetrahedron, a small pyramid standing about 0.9 meter (3 feet) tall with
three triangular-shaped sides and a base.
When Pathfinder is poised to enter the Martian atmosphere, its main components are the
aeroshell, folded lander and rover, parachute, airbag system and three rocket engines.
Combined, the spacecraft’s mass is about 570 kilograms (1,256 pounds) at entry.
Once it has landed and its airbags have been deflated, Pathfinder’s mass will be about
360 kilograms (793 pounds). Subsystems contributing to its landed weight include the opening/uprighting mechanism, lander cabling and electronics, instruments and rover. When it is
unfolded and lying flat on the surface, the spacecraft will measure 2.75 meters (9 feet) across
with a mast-mounted camera standing up about 1.5 meters (5 feet) from the ground.
The lander is controlled by a derivative of the commercially available IBM 6000 computer. This processor and associated components are radiation-hardened and mounted on a single electronics board. The computer has a 32-bit architecture which executes about 20 million
instructions per second. The computer will store flight software as well as engineering and science data, including images and rover information, in 128 megabytes of dynamic random
access memory.
During interplanetary cruise, the spacecraft requires 178 watts of electrical power, provided by 2.5 square meters (27 square feet) of gallium arsenide solar cells.
The lander has three solar panels, with a total area of 2.8 square meters (30 square feet)
and supplying up to 1,200 watt-hours of power per day on clear days. At night, the lander will
operate on rechargeable silver zinc batteries with a capacity at the beginning of the Mars surface mission of more than 40 amp-hours.
The Pathfinder lander carries a camera on a mast to survey its immediate surroundings.
The camera has two optical paths for stereo imaging, each with a filter wheel giving 12 color
bands in the 0.35 to 1.1 micron range; exposures through different filters can be combined to
produce color images. The camera’s field-of-view is 14 degrees in both horizontal and vertical
directions, and it will be able to take one frame (256 by 256 pixels) every two seconds.