Thank you, Tiffany, and thank you for joining us this afternoon. Let me start by laying out our results for this
quarter. Our Q3 total company revenue was $9.1 billion, up 1% year-over-year and 6% over Q2. Our global
comparable store sales declined 3% year-over-year driven by a negative 2% comp growth in North America and a
negative 14% comp growth in China and partially offset by strong performance in Japan. Our global operating
margins contracted by 70 basis points to 16.7% and overall earnings per share for the quarter was $0.93.
Our total company results were in line with guidance, but international performance, particularly in China, was
challenged. We are not satisfied with the results, but our actions are making an impact, leading business and
operational indicators are trending in the right direction ahead of our financial results and our runway for
improvement is long.
We see green shoots in our US business driven by the three-part action plan outlined last quarter. First, meet and
unlock capacity for new demand through a relentless focus on improvements to our US store operations and on
elevating the experience we create for our partners and customers. Second, attract new customers and drive
transaction growth by launching and integrating more exciting new products with relevant marketing while
maintaining our focus on core coffee forward offerings. And third, reach new customers, and demonstrate our
value by making sure customers believe the Starbucks experience is worth it every time.
First, our largest opportunity, meet and unlock capacity for new demand. A relentless focus on improving
operational execution across our nearly 10,000 US company-operated stores is the cornerstone of our near term
plan. While it is early days of progress, our plan is working.
If you walk away from today's call with one thought, let it be the significant changes and long-term upside potential
taking place within our US stores and across our end-to-end supply chain to unlock growth, enhance the
customer experience, and drive cost efficiencies.
Within our stores, we've seen material positive momentum across core store health and performance metrics with
notable improvements in partner scheduling and turnover, critical store issues, and inventory management.
Stores ranked in our top two operational performance quartiles reached a new high during the quarter, a 28%
upwards shift from Q2, but we have more opportunity.
Our focus on operational excellence driven by Reinvention plan has led to a multi-second year-over-year
improvement in out-of-the-window times, a nearly 50% reduction in calls received by our Customer Contact
Center for my order took too long and Mobile Order & Pay and delivery uptime rates of 99%. These are key
indicators of our work to drive growth by addressing customer wait times, product availability, and the customer
experience.
This quarter, we also introduced phase one of our Siren Craft System, which includes several process and
partner driven enhancements to our US store operations. Changes include a new peak time play caller role,
strategic investments in partner hours, training, new routines, simple enhancements to technology, and an
evolved beverage build process. Early deployment across 1,200 stores demonstrated a material incremental
improvement across key performance, throughput efficiency, and reliability metrics. Encouraged by this, we fully
deployed Siren Craft System process improvements across our entire portfolio of US company-operated stores
this week.
Later this quarter, we will begin rolling out a simple refit to our espresso machines which we expect to improve
espresso throughput by up to 15% without compromising quality, and with a minor software change in our store
production systems, we have a similar ability to improve food throughput. When paired with Siren System
equipment announced as part of our Reinvention plan, these new processes become a force multiplier that we
expect to drive a true step change improvement.
Early assessments demonstrate the capability to drive a 10 to 20 second wait time reduction and a resulting comp
opportunity range of 1% to 1.5%.
Leveraging our Deep Brew analytics platform, we have identified customer experience outlier stores,
approximately 10% of our network, and have developed targeted plans to address and improve them including
accelerated Siren System deployment. Similarly, we are accelerating the pace of our new store builds and
renovations with 580 net new builds and more than 800 renovations planned in North America for FY 2024.
Store development efforts are focused on Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities where we see population growth and forecast
both underserved demand and high incrementality. Increasingly, these new store builds and renovations also
include Siren System equipment. In line with prior guidance, we remain on track to deploy equipment in less than
10% of company-operated stores by the end of FY 2024 and about 40% by the end of FY 2026.
Building on our pilot, Starbucks and Gopuff have agreed to terms for an expanded relationship to open 100
delivery-only kitchens across the US. We're also accelerating the rollout of digital storyboards with target
deployment across most US stores in the next two years, a year earlier than originally anticipated.
Lastly, we're working in other ways to enhance the café experience. This includes new and expanded seating
options that elevate many stores, while upholding a safe and inviting place for partners and customers.
A key outcome of our operational efforts has been material and sustained improvements to the partner
experience. Driven by precision partner-centric staffing and scheduling efforts, we ended the quarter with a new
post-pandemic low partner turnover rate, the best shift completion rate in two years and a 13% improvement in
average hours per partner, now the highest on record. These initiatives create more stability in our stores, provide
more predictability for our partners and sustain our experience flywheel.
Looking beyond our stores, we continue to realize new efficiencies, cost savings, and performance improvements
across our end-to-end supply chain thanks to strong support from our suppliers and we see even more headroom.
We have a structured process to realize significant continued improvements across our end-to-end supply chain.
We are ahead of plan on productivity. We expect our productivity to drive efficiency and unlock capital from areas
that don't touch the customer.
In turn, these savings will enable us to target investments that drive value for our customers beginning later in Q4,
reigniting our North American flywheel for growth. We're early days on this journey, building both our strategic
sourcing and revenue management capabilities.
Our second priority is to drive demand through relevant product innovation with coffee at our core. We've seen
meaningful improvement here as well. This quarter, we drove traffic into our stores through an engaging and
innovative pipeline of products supported by integrated marketing campaigns.
Cold share was up 1% year-over-year, representing 76% of our beverage mix through the quarter. Our newly
formulated Iced Coffee received positive feedback. Our strength in cold espresso innovation continued to drive
the platform's growth, up 4% year-over-year. And we launched Starbucks Milano Duetto, whole bean coffee in
Milan, ahead of a global launch this October.
Beyond coffee, our new Summer-Berry Starbucks Refreshers, beverages with Pearls, drove the highest week-
one product launch in our history. Their success buoyed the entire Starbucks Refreshers beverage platform to an
all-time high during the quarter.
As mentioned in Q2, we continue to build out our 24-month product pipeline while accelerating our pace of
innovation. For example, recognizing the growing appeal and opportunity created by the energy category, we
launched a new Handcrafted Iced Energy beverages across our US stores in just three months compared to a
normal 12 to 18 months.
Looking forward, we believe our Q4 product offerings, including the return of Pumpkin Spice combined with
supporting marketing activities and offers, provides the right formula to drive customer interest, demand, and
deeper engagement with both new and existing customers.
Our third and final near-term priority is to reach new customers and demonstrate the value we offer by ensuring
the Starbucks experience is worth it every time.
Recognizing the premium position of our brand, we've been measured in our use of offers. During this quarter,
only 14% of our transactions were driven by offers compared to a competitor average of 29%. Of offer-driven
transactions, 10% was star-based offers targeted to Starbucks Rewards Members. Only 4% were driven by price-
based offers.