What is technology?1 In the narrowest sense, technology consists of manufactured objects like tools (axes, arrowheads, and their modern equivalents)
and containers (pots, water reservoirs, buildings). Their purpose is either to
enhance human capabilities (e.g., with a hammer you can apply a stronger
force to an object) or to enable humans to perform tasks they could not
perform otherwise (with a pot you can transport larger amounts of water;
with your hands you cannot). Engineers call such objects “hardware”. Anthropologists speak of “artifacts”.
But technology does not end there. Artifacts have to be produced. They
have to be invented, designed, and manufactured. This requires a larger
system including hardware (such as machinery or a manufacturing plant),
factor inputs (labor, energy, raw materials, capital), and finally “software”
(know-how, human knowledge and skills). The latter, for which the French
use the term technique, represents the disembodied nature of technology, its
knowledge base. Thus, technology includes both what things are made and
how things are made.
Finally, knowledge, or technique, is required not only for the production
of artifacts, but also for their use. Knowledge is needed to drive a car or use
a bank account. Knowledge is needed both at the level of the individual,
in complex organizations, and at the level of society. A typewriter, without
a user who knows how to type, let alone how to read, is simply a useless,
heavy piece of equipment.
Technological hardware varies in size and complexity, as does the “software” required to produce and use hardware. The two are interrelated and
require both tangible and intangible settings in the form of spatial structures and social organizations. Institutions, including governments, firms,
and markets, and social norms and attitudes, are especially important in
determining how systems for producing and using artifacts emerge and function. They determine how particular artifacts and combinations of artifacts
originate, which ones are rejected or which ones become successful, and, if
successful, how quickly they are incorporated in the economy and the society.
The latter step is referred to as technology diffusion.