4.3 Protecting Data on Telework Client Devices
Telework often involves creating and editing work-related information such as email, word processing
documents, and spreadsheets. Because that data is important, it should be treated like other important
assets of the organization. Two things an organization can do to protect data on telework devices are to
secure it on the telework device and to periodically back it up to a location controlled by the organization.
More information on this is provided in Sections 4.3.1 through 4.3.3. Organizations can also choose not to
allow the organization’s information to be stored on telework devices, but to instead store it centrally at
the organization.
Sensitive information, such as certain types of personally identifiable information (PII) (e.g., personnel
records, medical records, financial records), that is stored on or sent to or from telework devices should be
protected so that malicious parties cannot access or alter it. For example, teleworkers often forget that
 32 For more information on application whitelisting, see NIST SP 800-167, Guide to Application Whitelisting
(http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-167).
NIST SP 800-46 REV. 2 GUIDE TO ENTERPRISE TELEWORK,
REMOTE ACCESS, AND BYOD SECURITY
26
This publication is available free of charge from: http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-46r2
storing sensitive information on a CD that is carried with their device, or printing the information on a
public printer, can also expose the information in ways that are not significant within a typical enterprise
environment. An unauthorized release of sensitive information could damage the public’s trust in an
organization, jeopardize the organization’s mission, or harm individuals if their personal information has
been released.
4.3.1 Encrypting Data at Rest
All telework devices, regardless of their size or location, can be stolen. Some thieves may want to read
the contents of the data on the device, and quite possibly use that data for criminal purposes. To prevent
this, an organization should have a policy of encrypting all sensitive data when it is at rest on the device
and on removable media used by the device. The creation and use of cryptographic keys for encrypting
remote data at rest should follow the same policies that an organization has for other keys that protect data
at rest.33
There are many methods for protecting data at rest, and they mostly depend on the type of device or
removable media that is being protected. Most operating systems have their own data encryption
mechanisms, and there are also numerous third-party applications that provide similar capabilities.
34
Generally, when technologies such as full disk encryption are being used to protect data at rest on PCs,
teleworkers should shut down their telework devices instead of placing them into sleep mode when the
devices will not be used for an extended time or when the teleworker will not be with the device. This
helps ensure that the data at rest and the decryption key are protected by the storage encryption
technology.