This year, I would like to describe two other investments that we expect to maintain
indefinitely. Like Coke and AMEX, these commitments are not huge relative to our resources.
They are worthwhile, however, and we were able to increase both positions during 2023.
At yearend, Berkshire owned 27.8% of Occidental Petroleum’s common shares and also
owned warrants that, for more than five years, give us the option to materially increase our
ownership at a fixed price. Though we very much like our ownership, as well as the option,
Berkshire has no interest in purchasing or managing Occidental. We particularly like its vast oil
and gas holdings in the United States, as well as its leadership in carbon-capture initiatives, though
the economic feasibility of this technique has yet to be proven. Both of these activities are very
much in our country’s interest.
Not so long ago, the U.S. was woefully dependent on foreign oil, and carbon capture had
no meaningful constituency. Indeed, in 1975, U.S. production was eight million barrels of
oil-equivalent per day (“BOEPD”), a level far short of the country’s needs. From the favorable
energy position that facilitated the U.S. mobilization in World War II, the country had retreated to
become heavily dependent on foreign – potentially unstable – suppliers. Further declines in oil
production were predicted along with future increases in usage.
9 
For a long time, the pessimism appeared to be correct, with production falling to five
million BOEPD by 2007. Meanwhile, the U.S. government created a Strategic Petroleum Reserve
(“SPR”) in 1975 to alleviate – though not come close to eliminating – this erosion of American
self-sufficiency.
And then – Hallelujah! – shale economics became feasible in 2011, and our energy
dependency ended. Now, U.S. production is more than 13 million BOEPD, and OPEC no longer
has the upper hand. Occidental itself has annual U.S. oil production that each year comes close to
matching the entire inventory of the SPR. Our country would be very – very – nervous today if
domestic production had remained at five million BOEPD, and it found itself hugely dependent
on non-U.S. sources. At that level, the SPR would have been emptied within months if foreign oil
became unavailable.
Under Vicki Hollub’s leadership, Occidental is doing the right things for both its country
and its owners. No one knows what oil prices will do over the next month, year, or decade. But
Vicki does know how to separate oil from rock, and that’s an uncommon talent, valuable to her
shareholders and to her country.
* * * * * * * * * * * *
Additionally, Berkshire continues to hold its passive and long-term interest in five very
large Japanese companies, each of which operates in a highly-diversified manner somewhat similar
to the way Berkshire itself is run. We increased our holdings in all five last year after Greg Abel
and I made a trip to Tokyo to talk with their managements.
Berkshire now owns about 9% of each of the five. (A minor point: Japanese companies
calculate outstanding shares in a manner different from the practice in the U.S.) Berkshire has also
pledged to each company that it will not purchase shares that will take our holdings beyond 9.9%.
Our cost for the five totals ¥1.6 trillion, and the yearend market value of the five was ¥2.9 trillion.
However, the yen has weakened in recent years and our yearend unrealized gain in dollars was
61% or $8 billion.
Neither Greg nor I believe we can forecast market prices of major currencies. We also don’t
believe we can hire anyone with this ability. Therefore, Berkshire has financed most of its Japanese
position with the proceeds from ¥1.3 trillion of bonds. This debt has been very well-received in
Japan, and I believe Berkshire has more yen-denominated debt outstanding than any other
American company. The weakened yen has produced a yearend gain for Berkshire of $1.9 billion,
a sum that, pursuant to GAAP rules, has periodically been recognized in income over the
2020-23 period.
In certain important ways, all five companies – Itochu, Marubeni, Mitsubishi, Mitsui and
Sumitomo – follow shareholder-friendly policies that are much superior to those customarily
practiced in the U.S. Since we began our Japanese purchases, each of the five has reduced the
number of its outstanding shares at attractive prices.
10 
Meanwhile, the managements of all five companies have been far less aggressive about
their own compensation than is typical in the United States. Note as well that each of the five is
applying only about 1⁄3 of its earnings to dividends. The large sums the five retain are used both to
build their many businesses and, to a lesser degree, to repurchase shares. Like Berkshire, the five
companies are reluctant to issue shares.
An additional benefit for Berkshire is the possibility that our investment may lead to
opportunities for us to partner around the world with five large, well-managed and well-respected
companies. Their interests are far more broad than ours. And, on their side, the Japanese CEOs
have the comfort of knowing that Berkshire will always possess huge liquid resources that can be
instantly available for such partnerships, whatever their size may be.
Our Japanese purchases began on July 4, 2019. Given Berkshire’s present size, building
positions through open-market purchases takes a lot of patience and an extended period of
“friendly” prices. The process is like turning a battleship. That is an important disadvantage which
we did not face in our early days at Berkshire. 