JOANN Receives Court Approval for Prepackaged Financial Recapitalization Plan
Apr 25, 2024
Expects to Emerge from Court-Supervised Process in the Coming Days with the Lowest Level of Debt in More than a Decade
HUDSON, Ohio, April 25, 2024 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- JOANN Inc. (“JOANN” or the “Company”), the nation’s category leader in sewing and fabrics
with one of the largest arts and crafts offerings, today announced that the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware has confirmed the
Company’s Prepackaged Joint Plan of Reorganization. JOANN expects to successfully complete its financial restructuring and emerge from the court supervised process in the coming days.
As reiterated throughout this expedited process, the Company’s more than 800 store locations remain open and JOANN.com continues to offer
supplies for any creative need, and the Company was able to preserve the jobs of its more than 18,000 Team Members in connection with this
process.
About JOANN
For 80 years, JOANN has inspired creativity in the hearts, hands, and minds of its customers. From a single storefront in Cleveland, Ohio, the nation’s
category leader in sewing and fabrics and one of the fastest growing competitors in the arts and crafts industry has grown to include 829 store
locations across 49 states and a robust e-commerce business. With the goal of helping every customer find their creative Happy Place, JOANN serves
as a convenient single source for all of the supplies, guidance, and inspiration needed to achieve any project or passion.
Forward-Looking Statements
This press release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The Company
intends such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in Section 27A of the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Readers can generally identify forward-looking statements by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,”
“might,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “seek,” “vision,” “should,” or the negative thereof or other variations thereon or comparable terminology. Forward-looking statements include those we make regarding the Company’s ability to continuing operating its business and implement the restructuring
pursuant to the Chapter 11 cases, including the timetable of completing such transactions, if at all.
The preceding list is not intended to be an exhaustive list of all of the Company’s forward-looking statements. The Company has based these forward-looking statements on its current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections. While the Company believes these expectations,
assumptions, estimates and projections are reasonable, such forward-looking statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks
and uncertainties, many of which are beyond the Company’s control. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue
reliance on such forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements included elsewhere in this press release are not guarantees. Any
forward-looking statement that the Company makes in this press release speaks only as of the date of such statement. Except as required by law, the
Company does not undertake any obligation to update or revise, or to publicly announce any update or revision to, any of the forward-looking
statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise after the date of this press release.