Why is this medication prescribed?
 Montelukast is used to prevent wheezing, difficulty breathing, chest tightness, and coughing caused by asthma in adults and children 12 months of age and older. Montelukast is also used to prevent bronchospasm (breathing difficulties) during exercise in adults and children 6 years of age and older. Montelukast is also used to treat the symptoms of seasonal (occurs only at certain times of the year), allergic rhinitis (a condition associated with sneezing and stuffy, runny or itchy nose) in adults and children 2 years of age and older, and perennial (occurs all year round) allergic rhinitis in adults and children 6 months of age and older. Montelukast should be used to treat seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis only in adults and children who cannot be treated with other medications. Montelukast is in a class of medications called leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs). It works by blocking the action of substances in the body that cause the symptoms of asthma and allergic rhinitis.
 

 How should this medicine be used?
 Montelukast comes as a tablet, a chewable tablet, and granules to take by mouth. Montelukast is usually taken once a day with or without food. When montelukast is used to treat asthma, it should be taken in the evening. When montelukast is used to prevent breathing difficulties during exercise, it should be taken at least 2 hours before exercise. If you are taking montelukast once a day on a regular basis, or if you have taken a dose of montelukast within the past 24 hours, you should not take an additional dose before exercising. When montelukast is used to treat allergic rhinitis, it may be taken at any time of day. Take montelukast at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take montelukast exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
 

 If you are giving the granules to your child, you should not open the foil pouch until your child is ready to take the medication. You may pour all of the granules directly from the packet into your child's mouth to be swallowed immediately.
 

 Do not use montelukast to treat a sudden attack of asthma symptoms. Your doctor will prescribe a short-acting inhaler to use during attacks. Talk to your doctor about how to treat symptoms of a sudden asthma attack. If your asthma symptoms get worse or if you have asthma attacks more often, be sure to call your doctor.
 

 If you are taking montelukast to treat asthma, continue to take or use all other medications that your doctor has prescribed to treat your asthma. Do not stop taking any of your medications or change the doses of any of your medications unless your doctor tells you that you should. If your asthma is made worse by aspirin, do not take aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) during your treatment with montelukast.
 

 Montelukast controls the symptoms of asthma and allergic rhinitis but does not cure these conditions. Continue to take montelukast even if you feel well. Do not stop taking montelukast without talking to your doctor.
 

 Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
 

 Other uses for this medicine
 This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
 

 What special precautions should I follow?
 Before taking montelukast,
 

 tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to montelukast or any other medications, or any of the ingredients in montelukast tablet, chewable tablet, or granules.
 

 tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention gemfibrozil (Lopid), phenobarbital and rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane, in Rifamate, Rifater). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you more carefully for side effects. 
 

 tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
 tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking montelukast, call your doctor.
 

 if you have phenylketonuria (PKU, an inherited condition in which a special diet must be followed to prevent damage to your brain that can cause severe intellectual disability), you should know that the chewable tablets contain aspartame that forms phenylalanine.
 

 What special dietary instructions should I follow?
 Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
 

 What should I do if I forget a dose?
 Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. Do not take more than one dose of montelukast in a 24 hour period.
 

 What side effects can this medication cause?
 Montelukast may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
 headache
 heartburn
 stomach pain
 tiredness
 diarrhea