8 A day age
Failure atter failure.

Switching to mint took ages. You failed to enable one of us to connect at all. Her
money is going to another provider. Texting rarely works or can lake hours to deliver.
Now, my phone has stopped working af all, Wi-Fi works. Wi-Fi calling doesn't. The
other two phones on the plan work. | just gal an email telling me my next 6 months
are free. That would mean something if | actually had service. After all, zero service is
enly werk zero dollars.

Asoon to be @x-customer.

Date of experience: March 7, 2024

pf Usetul = oF Share i=

‘ss  Paeply trom Mint Mobile 21 hours aga

Hi, Thank you for contacting Mint Mobile. We're soery for any inconvenience you may
have capenenood with the serviog. This is definitely not the experionce we want you 1b
have when using our service. Since we aro unadle to provide you with assistance
‘through this channel, plaase contact us through our cusbomer support channels at 8O0-
683-7452 or our live chat plationn, 7 days a week from 5am to 7 pm PST, bo tatoo a
look at your case and find the best solution.

(Christy Unruh

irview @ US

2 days age

Hassle free service

The company never bothers me with upsells & my better hall will change service once
his contract is wp. He has had the same number since the earhy 90s.
Anything they might want to tell me abaut is done by my email, which is awesarnell

(Date of eaperonoe: February 06, 2024

eo Useful = of Share i=4

Grace Fong

lroview @ US

BREE 18 hours ago

A Canadian snowbird who wants to use the same phone number again
next year.

Jam a Canadian whe just began to “snewbird” in Hawaii this year - it means | came
hare in the winter for a few mente to agcape the deep frees. Having the Mint mabile
account has been very convenient for doing all kinds of business and shopping. This
lire | gulbseribed for three monihs a¢ | return to Canada April 23.1 will come back to
my apartment in Katbua, Hl again im Jan. 2025. It would be wonderful if | could use the
game phone nurnber nest year Would thal be posgible? Thank you.

(Date of experienom March 07, 2024

pf UWeetul = of Share -

BBE Updated 2 days ago
Had for almost 2 years and for the most...

Had fer almost 2 years and for the mest parl been happy until | go aver data limits.
I'm ok with 4 $0 called “SLOW DOWN" speed when over erry limit, but when it is se

slow info times out it is a totally useless service. Will be switehing te anether service
4% anether data level with Mint Mobile gives me more options with their competition.
