Raw material costs, including the costs for plastic bottles, aluminum cans, PET resin, carbon dioxide and high fructose corn syrup, are
 subject to significant price volatility, which may be worsened by periods of increased demand, supply constraints or high inflation.
 International or domestic geopolitical or other events, including pandemics, armed conflict or the imposition of tariffs and/or quotas by
 the U.S. government on any of these raw materials, could adversely impact the supply and cost of these raw materials to the Company
 or render them unavailable at commercially favorable terms or at all. In addition, there are no limits on the prices
 The Coca-Cola Company and other beverage companies can charge for concentrate. If the Company cannot offset higher raw material
 costs with higher selling prices, effective commodity price hedging, increased sales volume or reductions in other costs, the
 Company’s results of operations and profitability could be adversely affected.
 The Company uses significant amounts of fuel for its delivery fleet and other vehicles used in the distribution of its products.
 International or domestic geopolitical or other events could impact the supply and cost of fuel and the timely delivery of the
 Company’s products to its customers. Although the Company strives to reduce fuel consumption and uses commodity hedges to
 manage the Company’s fuel costs, there can be no assurance the Company will succeed in limiting the impact of fuel price increases
 or price volatility on the Company’s business or future cost increases, which could reduce the profitability of the Company’s
 operations.
 The Company uses a combination of internal and external freight shipping and transportation services to transport and deliver
 products. The Company’s freight cost and the timely delivery of its products may be adversely impacted by a number of factors that
 could reduce the profitability of the Company’s operations, including driver shortages, reduced availability of independent contractor
 drivers, higher fuel costs, weather conditions, traffic congestion, increased government regulation and other matters.
 The Company continues to make significant reinvestments in its business in order to evolve its operating model and to accommodate
 future growth and portfolio expansion, including supply chain optimization. The increased costs associated with these reinvestments,
 the potential for disruption in manufacturing and distribution and the risk the Company may not realize a satisfactory return on its
 investments could adversely affect the Company’s business, financial condition or results of operations.
 The reliance on purchased finished products from external sources could have an adverse impact on the Company’s profitability.
 The Company does not, and does not plan to, manufacture all of the products it distributes and, therefore, remains reliant on purchased
 finished products from external sources to meet customer demand. As a result, the Company is subject to incremental risk, including,
 but not limited to, product quality and availability, price variability and production capacity shortfalls for externally purchased
 finished products, which could have an impact on the Company’s profitability and customer relationships. Particularly, the Company
 is subject to the risk of unavailability of still products that it acquires from other manufacturers, leading to an inability to meet
 consumer demand for these products. In most instances, the Company’s ability to negotiate the prices at which it purchases finished
 products from other U.S. Coca-Cola bottlers is limited pursuant to The Coca-Cola Company’s right to unilaterally establish the prices,
 or certain elements of the formulas used to determine the prices, for such finished products under the RMA, which could have an
 adverse impact on the Company’s profitability.
 Changes in public and consumer perception and preferences, including concerns related to product safety and sustainability,
 artificial ingredients, brand reputation and obesity, could reduce demand for the Company’s products and reduce profitability.
 Concerns about perceived negative safety and quality consequences of certain ingredients in the Company’s products, such as nonnutritive sweeteners or ingredients in energy drinks, may erode consumers’ confidence in the safety and quality of the Company’s
 products, whether or not justified. The Company’s business is also impacted by changes in consumer concerns or perceptions
 surrounding the product manufacturing processes and packaging materials, including single-use and other plastic packaging, and the
 environmental and sustainability impact of such manufacturing processes and packaging materials. Any of these factors may reduce
 consumers’ willingness to purchase the Company’s products and any inability on the part of the Company to anticipate or react to such
 changes could result in reduced demand for the Company’s products or erode the Company’s competitive and financial position and
 could adversely affect the Company’s business, reputation, financial condition or results of operations.
 The Company’s success depends on its ability to maintain consumer confidence in the safety and quality of all of its products. The
 Company has rigorous product safety and quality standards. However, if beverage products taken to market are or become
 contaminated or adulterated, the Company may be required to conduct costly product recalls and may become subject to product
 liability claims and negative publicity, which could cause its business and reputation to suffer.
 9
 The Company’s success also depends in large part on its ability and the ability of The Coca-Cola Company and other beverage
 companies it works with to maintain the brand image of existing products, build up brand image for new products and brand
 extensions and maintain its corporate reputation and social license to operate. Engagements by the Company’s executives in social and
 public policy debates may occasionally be the subject of criticism from advocacy groups that have differing points of view and could
 result in adverse media and consumer reaction, including product boycotts. Similarly, the Company’s sponsorship relationships and
 charitable giving program could subject the Company to negative publicity as a result of actual or perceived views of organizations the
 Company sponsors or supports financially. Likewise, negative postings or comments on social media or networking websites about the
 Company, The Coca-Cola Company or one of the products the Company carries, even if inaccurate or malicious, could generate
 adverse publicity that could damage the reputation of the Company’s brands or the Company.
 The Company’s business depends substantially on consumer tastes, preferences and shopping habits that change in often unpredictable
 ways. As a result of certain health and wellness trends, including concern over the public health consequences associated with obesity,
 consumer preferences over the past several years have shifted from sugar-sweetened sparkling beverages to diet sparkling beverages,
 tea, sports drinks, enhanced water and bottled water. As the Company distributes, markets and manufactures beverage brands owned
 by others, the success of the Company’s business depends in large measure on the ability of The Coca-Cola Company and other
 beverage companies to develop and introduce product innovations to meet the changing preferences of the broad consumer market,
 and failure to satisfy these consumer preferences could adversely affect the Company’s profitability