NetChoice’s Challenge to Florida’s S.B. 7072
Florida’s S.B. 7072 imposes restrictions on any information service, system, Internet search engine, or
access software provider that enables access by multiple users to a computer server, is organized as a legal
entity, does business in Florida, and satisfies certain specified user- or revenue-based thresholds. Thus,
while the litigation about the law emphasized the limitations it imposed on social media platforms, the
law applied more broadly. NetChoice challenged restrictions that generally fall into two categories:
content moderation restrictions and individualized-explanation requirements.
The Supreme Court’s analysis in Moody focused on the content moderation restrictions. Those provisions
limit the ability of covered platforms to delete content, make content less visible to other users, or ban
users. Under S.B. 7072, platforms may not “deplatform” a political candidate or deprioritize a candidate’s
or “journalistic enterprise’s” posts. They must “apply censorship, deplatforming, and shadow banning
standards in a consistent manner,” and they cannot change the rules or terms that apply to users more than
once every 30 days. Deplatforming occurs when a platform bans a user for at least 14 days. Shadow
banning occurs when a platform deletes a user’s content or makes the account’s content less visible to
other users.
Before S.B. 7072 took effect, NetChoice sued, alleging that the content moderation provisions, on their
face, violate the First Amendment. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed a
preliminary injunction barring enforcement of the content moderation provisions while NetChoice’s
challenge is litigated. The court held that the provisions likely “trigger[] First Amendment scrutiny
because [S.B. 7072] restricts social-media platforms’ exercise of editorial judgment.” It decided that the
challenged provisions likely fail constitutional scrutiny because they lack a “substantial or compelling
interest that would justify [the provisions’] significant restrictions on platforms’ editorial judgment.”
NetChoice’s Challenge to Texas’s H.B. 20
Texas’s H.B. 20 applies to social media platforms with more than 50 million monthly active users in the
United States. The law defines social media platforms as public websites or applications that enable users
to create accounts and communicate for the primary purpose of posting user-generated information.
Internet service providers, email providers, and websites “that consist primarily of news, sports,
entertainment, or other” content that is not user generated are excluded from the definition.
As with Florida’s law, H.B. 20 limits when covered platforms may delete or restrict access to user-posted
content. Subject to enumerated exceptions, covered platforms are prohibited from censoring a user’s
content based on viewpoint or the user’s geographic location in Texas. Censor is defined to mean
“block[ing], ban[ning], remove[ing], deplatform[ing], demonetiz[ing], de-boost[ing], restrict[ing],
deny[ing] equal access or visibility to, or otherwise discriminat[ing] against expression.”
Again, NetChoice challenged H.B. 20’s content moderation provisions on their face and asked a court to
enjoin their enforcement before the law took effect. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit denied
the request. Expressly disagreeing with the Eleventh Circuit’s reasoning about Florida’s law, the Fifth
Circuit held that Texas’s content moderation provisions do not likely implicate First Amendment rights.
According to the Fifth Circuit, NetChoice was seeking to assert a “right to censor what people say” that is
not protected by the First Amendment. In the alternative, the court held that, even if the law restricted
protected expression, it is a content- and viewpoint-neutral law—so subject to intermediate scrutiny—and
Texas’s interest in protecting the free exchange of ideas is sufficiently important to satisfy that standard.