Types of sippy cups
 You can choose from a few different types of sippy cups:
 Soft spout. These are the closest to a bottle, containing a nipple spout that still allows for sucking. They can be used to transition your baby to latched tops or open tops by allowing them to first get used to holding and gripping the cup and its handles.
 Hard spout. Hard-spout sippy cups encourage your child to transition from sucking to tilting and sipping. It’s often best to introduce it after they’ve mastered the soft spout.
 Straw. Straw sippy cups, as you may have guessed, employ a straw rather than a spout. Some feel that a straw is preferable for speech development over a spout. They can also help your child get used to drinking from a straw and using a cup.
 No spout or flat lid. These sippy cups are spoutless with a flat top (sometimes referred to as 360 cups). They allow for water to flow from all edges of the cup opening to resemble the action of a real cup while still using a lid. They typically lack any no-spill valves, and that’s a good thing.
 Sippy cups can be a good option for bridging the gap between a bottle and an open cup. They prevent spilling while still giving your child more independence.
 Your child may not take to the first option you present to them, but keep trying! The key to success is choosing cups that are appropriate for your child’s age and stage of development.
 

 

 

 6 to 12 months old
 As your baby continues transitioning to cup use, the options get more varied and include:
 spout cups
 spoutless cups
 straw cups
 The variety you choose is up to you and your baby.
 Since the cup may be too heavy for your little one to hold with just one hand, cups with handles are helpful at this stage. And even if a cup has a larger capacity, resist filling it to the top so your baby can maneuver it.
 Continue to supervise your baby using a cup until they are at least 1 year old.
 Best soft-spout cup
 NUK Learner Cup
 

 Price: $$
 Pros: Options for both 5- and 10-ounce cup sizes; removable handles for when your little one is ready to transition to more of a cup; includes a plastic lid to help prevent spills when traveling
 Cons: Spout can be slow and require hard sucking
 The NUK Learner Cup comes in 5- or 10-ounce sizes and features removable handles for your growing baby.
 It’s appropriate for babies 6 months old or over, and it’s made from BPA-free plastic. The cup has a soft silicone spout that has a special vent to prevent baby from swallowing too much air.
 Parents share that this cup is easy to handwash and that the travel piece that comes with the cup prevents leaks when it’s tossed in a diaper bag. Others say their babies had trouble getting milk out of the cup, even when sucking very hard.
 Shop now at Amazon
 Best straw sippy cup
 ZoLi BOT Straw Sippy Cup
 

 Price: $$$
 Pros: Weighted straw makes it easier to get the last of the liquid out; dishwasher safe
 Cons: One of the more expensive cup options; not the thickest of straws and can be bitten through
 The ZoLi BOT Straw Sippy Cup is suitable for babies 9 months old or over. It features a weighted straw, so your little one can get liquid no matter how the cup is oriented.
 The plastic is BPA-free and can be hand washed or run through your dishwasher for cleaning. You can also purchase replacement straws.
 Parents who like this cup say that it’s simple to assemble and that the handles are easy for babies to hold.
 On the downside, it can also be difficult to screw the top on correctly, making it prone to leaks. The cup can also leak if the straw becomes damaged from biting or normal wear and tear.
 Shop now at Amazon
 Best spoutless sippy cup
 Munchkin Miracle 360 Trainer Cup
 

 Price: $
 Pros: Budget-friendly option; dishwasher safe; comes in a variety of sizes and colors
 Cons: The top’s design can allow for big spills; the design can be hard for some children to figure out how to drink from
 The Munchkin Miracle 360 Trainer Cup is an affordable option. The unique spoutless construction allows babies 6 months old and over to simulate drinking from an open cup without the spills.
 It’s also streamlined with only three main pieces and top-rack dishwasher safe.
 Some parents complain that, while the cup is spill-proof, their smart babies figured out they can pour the liquid by simply pressing on the center of the top.
 Shop now on Amazon
 12 to 18 months old
 Toddlers have mastered more dexterity with their hands, so many may graduate from handles at this age. Cups with a curved or hourglass shape can help little hands grip and hold.
 Best for toddlers
 First Essentials by NUK Fun Grips Hard Spout Sippy Cup
 

 Price: $
 Pros: Made in the United States; dishwasher safe; hourglass shape is easier to hold without needing handles
 Cons: The cup’s wide base won’t fit in standard cup holders
 The economical First Essentials by NUK Fun Grips Sippy Cup (previously sold as Gerber Graduates) is made in the United States from BPA-free plastic.
 The two-part design is simple and the hourglass shape is easy for toddlers ages 12 months and older to grab.
 This cup features a 100 percent spill-proof, leak-proof, break-proof guarantee. You may wash this sippy cup either by hand or in the dishwasher.
 On the negative side, some reviewers say the cup’s base is too wide and that it doesn’t fit easily into standard cup holders or diaper bag pockets.
 Shop now at Amazon
 Best straw sippy cup
 Nuby No-Spill Cup with Flex Straw
 

 Price: $
 Pros: Budget-friendly option; contoured design offers secure grip without handles; thicker straw
 Cons:10-ounce size might be larger than some children can easily handle; valve in the straw requires a “squeeze and suck” action
 Nuby’s No-Spill Flex Straw Cup is a popular choice for toddlers who prefer straws to spouts. The silicone straw has a built-in valve to prevent spills and leaks, and it’s sturdy enough to stand up to occasional biting.
 While this 10-ounce cup doesn’t have handles, it does feature a contoured design for little hands to grip and is made from BPA-free plastic.
 The straw does require a “squeeze and suck” action to get liquid through the valve, and some tots find this difficult to master. That said, many parents share that the protection the valve provides is worth the extra effort.
 Shop now on Amazon