In the multicurrency era, domestic public 
 debt reforms include the adoption of the cash 
 budgeting system and introduction of new 
 government securities in secondary market. 
 According to the 2009 budget statement, the 
 Government of National Unity (GNU) 
 effected the cash budgeting system to 
 circumvent further accrual of domestic debt. 
 The cash budgeting system restricted 
 government expenditures to available 
 revenue instead of the cash flow profile 
 associated with approved estimates. The 
 cash budgeting system insulated monetary 
 operations from fiscal operations and the 
 domestic debt market was made inactive. 
 However, in 2014, the government 
 abandoned the cash budgeting system 
 leading to the rejuvenation of excessive 
 fiscal deficits, which aggravated domestic 
 public borrowing and a slowdown in 
 economic growth (IMF, 2015). As a control 
 measure to the rising domestic public 
 indebtedness, the Minister of Finance and 
 Economic Development was instructed by 
 the parliament to set out clearly in the fiscal
 

 policy the volume of net treasury securities 
 issuance to be conducted for fiscal policy 
 purposes each year, and how the raised 
 money would be used (ZEPARU, 2013). 
 Also, in a move meant to end quasi-fiscal 
 activities by the reserve bank, the GNU in 
 2009 appointed the Commercial Bank of 
 Zimbabwe as the state’s bank while 
 modalities were being put in place to restore 
 financial sanity at the apex bank (GoZ, 
 2009a; 2009b).  
 In 2014, the government for the first time 
 started to trade infrastructure bonds (GoZ, 
 2014b). The introduction of the 5-year tenor 
 infrastructure bonds at a fixed interest of 9.5 
 percent, has not only enhanced financial 
 deepening in the economy but also 
 contributed to a paradigm shift in the 
 structure of government debt. Also, the 
 introduction of long term debt instruments 
 by the government was intended at 
 minimising rollover risk and lessen 
 borrowing expenses associated with short 
 term debt (Infrastructure Development Bank 
 of Zimbabwe “IDBZ”, 2016). Until now, the 
 government has raised US$5 million, $15 
 million and $22 million in 2015, 2016 and 
 2017, respectively, through the trading of 
 infrastructure bonds on the capital markets 
 (IDBZ, 2015, 2016; GoZ, 2017). At present, 
 the government debt securities are being 
 traded on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange in 
 the same manner as other stocks.
 

 To provide for the management of public 
 debt in Zimbabwe on a statutory basis, 
 mainly foreign public debt, the public debt 
 reforms included public sector financial 
 reforms and the institutionalisation and 
 operationalisation of a Debt Management 
 Office, which is currently housed in the 
 Ministry of Finance and Economic 
 Development. The responsibilities of the 
 Debt Office are among others, to ensure 
 public debt database validation and 
 reconciliation with all creditors and to 
 provide for the raising, management and 
 servicing of loans by the state
 

 The Public Management Act Amended 
 (2015) further stipulates that the Debt Office 
 shall (1) formulate and publish a Medium 
 Term Debt Management Strategy, (2) 
 formulate and publish an annual borrowing 
 plan, which includes a borrowing limit, and 
 (3) undertake an annual debt sustainability 
 analyses (MOFED, 2012).In 2011, the GNU instituted several foreign 
 policy shifts, intended at reducing the 
 country’s foreign public debt overhang, by 
 re-engaging with creditors and the global 
 community. The intention of the new re
 engagement policy reform was to seek 
 comprehensive debt relief initiatives, as well 
 as opening up new lines of offshore 
 financing.