Section 230 was enacted in 1996 in response to a trial court ruling that allowed an online platform to be subject to liability for hosting defamatory speech, in part because the platform had said it would police its site for unwanted speech. Congress was concerned that this ruling created a perverse incentive for sites to refrain from monitoring content to avoid liability. Section 230 can be seen as speech-protective: by barring lawsuits that would punish platforms for hosting speech, it may encourage platforms to err on the side of hosting more content, while still allowing sites to take down content they see as objectionable. To this end, Section 230 contains two different provisions that courts have generally viewed as two distinct liability shields.
First, Section 230(c)(1) states that interactive computer service providers and users may not “be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another” person. This provision has been broadly interpreted to bar a wide variety of suits that would treat service providers as the publisher of another’s content, including claims of defamation, negligence, discrimination under the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and state criminal prosecutions. However, if a site helps develop the unlawful content, courts have ruled that Section 230(c)(1) immunity does not apply. Accordingly, courts have, for example, rejected applying Section 230 to cases brought by the FTC against a defendant website that solicited or was involved in publishing allegedly unlawful content. More generally, Section 230 will not bar suits that seek to hold sites liable for their own conduct, rather than another’s content. But courts have said that acts inherent to publishing, such as reviewing, suggesting, and sometimes even editing content, may not, by themselves, qualify as helping develop the challenged content. As a consequence, Section 230(c)(1) immunity can apply regardless of whether the site chooses to actively police content or whether it chooses to take a more hands-off approach.
Second, Section 230(c)(2) provides that interactive computer service providers and users may not be “held liable” for any voluntary, “good faith” action “to restrict access to or availability of material that the provider or user considers to be obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, excessively violent, harassing, or otherwise objectionable.” Section 230(c)(2) also immunizes providing “the technical means to restrict access” to objectionable material. Unlike Section 230(c)(1), Section 230(c)(2) applies only to good faith actions to restrict objectionable material. Courts have ruled that allegations of anticompetitive motives can demonstrate bad faith, disqualifying sites from claiming Section 230(c)(2) immunity. There are, however, relatively few published federal court cases interpreting this provision.
Because Section 230(c)(2) contains a good-faith requirement and Section 230(c)(1) does not, some courts have recognized the importance of determining when each immunity provision applies. At least one decision suggests that Section 230(c)(2) applies when a service provider “does filter out offensive material,” while Section 230(c)(1) applies when providers “refrain from filtering or censoring the information on their sites.” But, as one scholar has noted, other courts have cited Section 230(c)(1) when dismissing claims predicated on takedowns. Another possibility is that Section 230(c)(1) does not apply when the plaintiff’s own content is at issue—that is, while Section 230(c)(1) immunity only applies if a third party created the disputed content, Section 230(c)(2) can apply when a person sues a site for taking down the plaintiff’s own content. Again, however, other decisions suggest that courts may apply Section 230(c)(1) even when the suit involves the plaintiff’s own content. Athird view is that Section 230(c)(2) might apply if the provider helps develop content and is therefore ineligible for (c)(1) immunity. In short, court rulings are inconsistent on the question of when each of the two immunity provisions governs.
Section230(e)expressly states that the law will not bar liability in certain cases.Defendants may not claim Section 230 immunity in federal criminal prosecutions, cases involving intellectual property laws, suits under the Electronic Communications Privacy Act or “similar” state laws, and certain civil actions and state criminal prosecutions relating to sex trafficking.
If Section 230’s liability shield does not apply, the person being sued will not automatically be held liable. Instead, it means only that courts can continue to adjudicate the case. The EO begins by stating in Section 1 the President’s belief that online platforms are engaging in “selective censorship,” harming national discourse and restricting Americans’ speech. Section 2 turns to the interpretation of Section 230(c), arguing that the “scope” of this immunity provision “should be clarified” and the law should not be extended to platforms that “engage in deceptive or pretextual actions” to censor “certain viewpoints.” The EO maintains that Congress intended Section 230(c) to only protect service providers that engage in “Good Samaritan” blocking of harmful content. Section 2 further states that providers should not be entitled to Section 230(c)(2) immunity if they remove content without acting in “good faith,” including by taking “deceptive or pretextual actions (often contrary to their stated terms of service)” to suppress certain viewpoints.
Section 2 also directs the Commerce Secretary, “in consultation with the Attorney General, and acting through the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA),” to request the FCC to issue regulations interpreting Section 230. Among other things, the EO, perhaps in response to the Section 230 jurisprudence discussed above, specifies that FCC’s proposed regulations should clarify:
(1) “the interaction between” Section 230(c)(1) and (c)(2) to explain when a service provider that cannot obtain Section 230(c)(2) immunity is also ineligible for protection under (c)(1); and (2) the meaning of “good faith” in Section 230(c)(2), including whether violating terms of service or failing to provide procedural protections qualifies as bad faith.
Section 4 of the EO instructs the FTC to “consider taking action, as appropriate and consistent with applicable law, to prohibit unfair or deceptive acts or practices.” Specifically, the EO suggests that if platforms “restrict speech in ways that do not align with those entities’ public representations about” how they monitor content on their sites, these acts may qualify as unfair or deceptive practices under the FTC Act. The EO also directs the FTC to consider whether complaints of “online censorship” received by the White House “allege violations of law,” and whether to develop a report on these complaints.
The other provisions of the EO assign additional tasks to more executive departments. Section 3 of the EO requires agency review of federal spending on advertising and marketing on online platforms, and Sections 5 and 6 contain instructions for the Attorney General to establish a working group and propose federal legislation to implement the policies announced in the EO.